{\rtf1\ansi\deff2
{\fonttbl{\f0\fswiss Helv;}{\f1\fnil System;}{\f2\fswiss Arial;}{\f3\fmodern Courier New;}{\f4\fnil Times New Roman;}{\f5\fnil Bookman Old Style;}}
{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue128;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue128;\red0\green0\blue0;}
{\stylesheet{\fs20 \snext0 Normal;}
}\pard\plain
{\up +}
{\up $}
{\up #}
\pard\keepn \b\fs28 AutoMap\plain\fs24 
\par \pard 
\par \fs20 This neat feature keeps track of where your character(s) have been and gives a player access to a graphical map of exactly where they are (if the character isn\'92t lost), what direction they're facing, and where they have been.  The nice thing is that it\'92s shared.  If one character goes down and completely maps level 1, then all of the other characters in the game have access to the same Map.  Mapping ability is based on a character\'92s Perception ability (See \uldb Guild Statistics\plain\fs20 ).  As a character becomes more powerful, they will be able to map more completely, not missing little things.  Once a square is properly mapped, it will not be "erased\'94 by another character with a lower perception ability.
\par \pard 
\par The map for a level is automatically updated as a character walks into unmapped areas.  Newly mapped areas will have small black squares with a little gray around them to show that is where a character has recently mapped.
\par 
\par \b\cf1 Getting Lost\plain\fs24 
\par \pard\li175 \fs20 If your character manages to get lost (by hitting a Teleporter, or something), the Automap will no longer reflect where you are.  A lost character can find themself by either stepping back into explored territory or figuring out where they are (by using their perception ability).
\par \fs24 
\par \pard \b\fs20\cf1 Resizing the Automap\plain\fs24 
\par \pard\li175 \fs20 You can resize the Automap by dragging the corners or double-clicking on the map itself.  When the Automap is smaller than the base size, the map will center itself in the window, allowing the area closest to the character to be seen.
\par 
\par If the Auto Change Level option in the Character\'92s Control Panel is set to true, the Automap will load each level and display it as the character moves between levels.  If this flag is not set, the Automap will display the same level until another level is manually selected with the Scrollbar.\fs24 
\par \pard \fs20 
\par \b\cf1 Redrawing the Automap\plain\fs24 
\par \pard\li175 \fs20 You may notice as you explore that the 'new' areas you step into are black squares with surrounding gray.  This can sometimes cause other map items (i.e. fog, water, etc) to look strange.  The reason for this 'grey mapping' is to show you where you most recently explored.  If you wish to redraw the Automap (i.e. get rid of the explore squares), you can Right Click on the Automap, or switch to another level.
\par \fs24 
\par \pard \b\fs20\cf1 Changing Levels\plain\fs24 
\par \pard\li175 \fs20 You can either use the scroll bar located in the Automap window, or use the \'91<\'91 and \'91>\'91 keys from any other window in the game to page through the levels.  The Automap will only allow levels that have been 'visited' to be accessible (i.e. if the deepest you have been is level 6, the Automap will not allow you to look at any levels deeper than 6 until somebody ventures down there!).\fs24 
\par \pard 
\par \fs20 You can access the AutoMap from the Dungeon by pressing F8 or clicking on the Map command in the Dungeon Commands Window.\fs24 
\par \fs20 
\par \b NOTE:\plain\fs20  even though you may have the Automap Window minimized, it will still be updated as you are walking through the maze just as if it was open.  This may cause the game to play slower on some systems.  If this happens, be sure to close the Automap window completely to increase the game play speed.
\par 
\par \i\cf2 Move to the next section to read about Encounters.
\par \pard Move to the previous section to read about the Dungeon.
\par \page
{\up +}
{\up $}
{\up #}
\pard\keepn \plain\b\fs28 Banish Spells\plain\fs24 
\par \pard 
\par \fs20 Taken from the art of demonology, spells of this kind are of ancient magic, of which little is known.  Used to banish demons and devils back to the planes of Hell from whence they came, the amount of damage inflicted by these spells can sometimes be extensive.  The effectiveness of these spells depends on the caster\'92s experience and the Magic Resistance of the monster.
\par \fs24 
\par \pard\li175 \b\fs20 Banish Devil\tab 
\par \plain\fs20 Base Level: 5\tab Guilds: Wiz (10), Hea
\par Required Stats: 13 Int, 15 Wis, 10 Con\tab 
\par \i COMBAT Spell, will cause 8 Monsters in 4 Groups to be Banished.\tab 
\par \plain\fs20 An ancient spell that invokes the fury of Hell to yank the specified target(s) back to the plane from whence they came. 
\par  
\par \b Banish Demon\tab 
\par \plain\fs20 Base Level: 6\tab Guilds: Wiz (12), Hea
\par Required Stats: 12 Int, 14 Wis, 10 Con\tab 
\par \i COMBAT Spell, will cause 8 Monsters in 4 Groups to be Banished.\tab 
\par \plain\fs20 A dark spell of old, much like Banish Devil, this spell calls upon Hades to take back those who have escaped.
\par \pard\li175 \fs24 
\par \pard \i\fs20\cf2 Move to the next section to read about Dispell Spells.
\par Move to the previous section to read about Movement Spells.
\par \page
{\up +}
{\up $}
{\up #}
\pard\keepn \plain\b\fs28 Bind Spells\plain\fs24 
\par \pard 
\par \fs20 Once the Charm spells were mastered, the Mages guild then realized that once a creature had been befriending or dominated that a way to keep the creature under control was required.  It was for this reason that the Bind class of spells was introduced - to reinforce a companions \'91binding\'92 to make it harder for them to break away from their master.  Bind spells will not work on companions that have joined an adventurer free of will.
\par \fs24 
\par \pard\li175 \b\fs20 Control 
\par \plain\fs20 Base Level: 3\tab Guilds: Mag
\par Required Stats: 12 Int, 12 Wis, 10 Cha\tab 
\par \i NON-COMBAT Spell, will increase the Bind level of a companion.
\par \plain\fs20 This spell can be used to reinforce the Bind that is already imposed on a companion. Note: This spell will not function on companions that have joined you of their own free will.
\par 
\par \b Bind\tab 
\par \plain\fs20 Base Level: 6\tab Guilds: Mag
\par Required Stats: 14 Int, 14 Wis, 16 Cha\tab 
\par \i NON-COMBAT Spell, will increase the binding level of a bound companion.\tab \plain\fs20 .
\par \pard\li175 This spell  is a  more powerful version of Control that will renew the Bind on a companion when it begins to fade. 
\par 
\par \b Domination\tab 
\par \plain\fs20 Base Level: 12\tab Guilds: Mag
\par Required Stats: 18 Int, 18 Wis, 18 Con, 18 Cha\tab 
\par \i NON-COMBAT Spell, will increase the binding level of a bound companion.\tab \plain\fs20 .
\par This is the most powerful of the Binding spells, and in the hands of a master Mage, almost no creature can resist it.\fs24 
\par \pard \fs20 
\par \i\cf2 Move to the next section to read about Heal Spells.
\par Move to the previous section to read about Charm Spells.
\par \page
{\up +}
{\up $}
{\up #}
\pard\keepn \plain\b\fs28 Character Information\plain\fs24 
\par \pard 
\par \fs20 To play Mordor, you must first create a character (your Mordor alter-ego).  Each character requires several basic pieces of information that the game uses in various ways.
\par 
\par The name that you wish to be known by is used whenever another character wishes to refer to you specifically.  For example, when giving gold or items, a name is required.  When healing, your character\'92s name is needed.  \cf2 Choose your name well since it cannot ever be changed again.\plain\fs20   Only one character in the game can have a given name at a time.
\par \pard 
\par The race you choose to be will determine your maximum age, how quickly you learn (gain experience) and how strong, intelligent, wise, healthy, charismatic and dexterous you can be.  There are several other important points concerning your race; they will be discussed later.  The race you choose will also determine the number of \'91stat points\'92 you have when creating your character.  You can discover this by exploring different race selections when creating your character.
\par \pard 
\par \b\cf1 Stats
\par \plain\fs20 There are six basic statistics (stats) that determine how well or poorly your character will do when faced with certain tasks (e.g. fighting, casting spells, etc.).  Some Items and Spells may require a minimum stat to use or cast.  Some guilds may also require a minimum stat to join.  Certain items found in the dungeon may modify a stat while equipped, but the unmodified (natural) stat is still used in some circumstances (i.e. the guilds look only at your natural unmodified stats when deciding if you may join.  Also, the ability to equip or use an item, along with the maximum spell points a character has, is based on a characters natural unmodified stats).  You may raise your natural stats by using certain items you can find in the dungeon.
\par \pard 
\par The six basic statistics (stats) are described as to what effect they have on your characters abilities.
\par \fs24 
\par \pard\fi175 \fs20\cf1 Strength (Str): Your character\'92s Physical Strength determines:\plain\fs24 
\par \pard\li355\fi175 \fs20\cf2 > Your chances of hitting a monster in combat
\par > How much damage is done when you hit a monster\plain\fs24 
\par \pard\fi175 \fs20\cf2 
\par \cf1 Intelligence (Int): Your character\'92s Intelligence determines:\plain\fs24 
\par \pard\li355\fi175 \fs20\cf2 > Your chances of hitting a monster in combat
\par > The maximum spell points that your character is allowed
\par > Your ability to identify an item
\par > Your ability to identify a monster\plain\fs24 
\par \pard\fi175 \fs20\cf2 
\par \cf1 Wisdom (Wis): Your character\'92s common sense and insight. This gives you:\plain\fs24 
\par \pard\li355\fi175 \fs20\cf2 > Your chances of hitting a monster in combat
\par > The maximum spell points your character is allowed
\par > Your ability to recognize a trap on a chest
\par > Your ability to identify an item
\par > Your ability to recognize a monster
\par > Your chances of leaving combat without being hit\plain\fs24 
\par \pard\fi175 \fs20\cf2 
\par \cf1 Constitution (Con): Your character\'92s "healthiness" consists of:\plain\fs24 
\par \pard\li355\fi175 \fs20\cf2 > The number of hits you receive when you make a level
\par > The chance of being raised when dead
\par > Your ability to resist special attacks from monsters:
\par    poison, disease, stoning, aging, paralysis, "breath" (being fire, cold or other
\par    breath types), and spells cast by monsters.\plain\fs24 
\par \pard\fi175 \fs20\cf2 
\par \cf1 Charisma (Cha): Your character\'92s beauty and leadership. It will determine:\plain\fs24 
\par \pard\li355\fi175 \fs20\cf2 > Your chances of having monsters join and become your companions
\par > How long a companion will stay with you
\par > The chance of monsters becoming hostile towards you\plain\fs24 
\par \pard\fi175 \fs20\cf2 
\par \cf1 Dexterity (Dex): Your character\'92s speed and agility determining:\plain\fs24 
\par \pard\li355\fi175 \fs20\cf2 > Your chance of hitting a monster in combat
\par > Your ability to disarm traps
\par > How long it takes your character to open a chest while in combat
\par > The chances a monster has of stealing from you
\par > Your chances of leaving combat without being hit
\par > Your chances of surprising monsters\plain\fs24 
\par \pard \fs20\cf2 
\par \plain\fs20 When a stat has reached its natural peak, it will appear in bold type on the screen.  For example: \b 26\plain\fs20 .
\par 
\par 
\par \b\cf1 Attack/Defense (Att/Def)
\par \plain\fs20 These numbers vary with what items you are wearing, your statistics (strength, etc.), your characters fighting ability and experience level.  Some spells will modify your Att/Def, making your character harder to hit.  The Att/Def of your character is a percentage representation of how well you do in combat.  An Att/Def of 9/12 means that you have an 9% additional chance of hitting a monster while the monster has an additional 12% chance of missing you.  Keep in mind that as your character progresses and as you head deeper into the dungeon, the monsters will be more experienced and have a higher Att/Def.
\par \pard 
\par 
\par \b\cf1 Hits
\par \plain\fs20 Hits determine how much abuse and damage your character can take before dying.  They depend heavily on the level in your strongest guild.  Your constitution is also important in determining your maximum hit points.  You can receive "bonus" hits when you make a level if your constitution is above 16 (and you have not yet reached ML in the current guild you are receiving hits from).  When your character\'92s hits reach 0, you are dead.  You can be raised by another character or in the morgue (discussed later).  Hit points are expressed in a fraction.  For example, 12/12 means that you are at full strength, while 6/12 means you are at half strength.  The first number represents your current hits while the second number represents your maximum hits.  You can raise your hits by achieving higher levels in your guild or having \'91special\'92 events occur.  If you ever see 0/12, you will be dead.  Some guilds have the ability to cast spells (e.g. Healers) and heal lost hits.
\par \pard 
\par 
\par \b\cf1 Experience
\par \plain\fs20 Experience is used to determine how much your character has learned (from fighting, casting spells, opening chests, etc.).  When you have reached a certain amount of experience, your guild will allow you to "make level" which will increase your character\'92s powers.  Both your race and guild will affect how much experience is required to make a level in your current guild.
\par 
\par 
\par \b\cf1 Gold
\par \plain\fs20 Gold in Mordor is practically weightless, so there is no limit as to how much your character can carry.  Gold is what makes the entire city function.  When buying items, making levels in guilds, raising dead characters or companions, you need gold.  It\'92s a good idea to use the bank to store your gold, considering that some monsters have the ability to steal it from you - and sometimes in great amounts.
\par \pard 
\par 
\par \b\cf1 Spell Points & Spell Level
\par \plain\fs20 Every character has a certain number of Spell Points that they can use for casting spells (even if they don't know any).  As a character's Intelligence and Wisdom go up, so do the maximum number of spell points that they have.  Like Hit Points, Spell Points are expressed in a fraction that show the current number of points and maximum number of points.  Every character also has a 'spell level', which is related to a character's \i current\plain\fs20  Guild & Guild Level.  The power of a spell is based on a character's spell level, which goes up as a character raises levels in their guild(s).
\par \pard 
\par \i\cf2 Move to the next section to read about Races.
\par Move to the previous section to read the Game Options Window.
\par \page
{\up +}
{\up $}
{\up #}
\pard\keepn \plain\b\fs28 Charm Spells\plain\fs24 
\par \pard 
\par \fs20 The pride of the Mages guild, these types of spells have the ability of controlling certain types of creatures ranging from Humanoids to Dragons and causing them to befriend the spellcaster, becoming their companion.  It is said that none can resist a Mage who has mastered this class of magical spells.  The effectiveness of these spells depends on the casters experience and the Magic and Charm Resistance of the monster.
\par \fs24 
\par \pard\li175 \b\fs20 Charm Insect\tab 
\par \plain\fs20 Base Level: 1\tab Guilds: Mag
\par Required Stats: 12 Int, 12 Wis\tab 
\par \i COMBAT Spell, will cause 4 Monsters in 1 Group to be Charmed.\tab 
\par \plain\fs20 This spell will bind one or more insects to the caster, causing them to become companions.
\par 
\par \b Charm Animal\tab 
\par \plain\fs20 Base Level: 2\tab Guilds: Mag
\par Required Stats: 12 Int, 12 Wis, 14 Cha\tab 
\par \i COMBAT Spell, will cause 4 Monsters in 1 Group to be Charmed.\tab 
\par \plain\fs20 An excellent spell for charming vicious animals, causing them to befriend the caster.
\par \pard\li175 
\par \b Charm Elemental\tab 
\par \plain\fs20 Base Level: 3\tab Guilds: Mag
\par Required Stats: 13 Int, 13 Wis, 15 Cha\tab 
\par \i COMBAT Spell, will cause 4 Monsters in 1 Group to be Charmed.\tab 
\par \plain\fs20 Much like Charm Animal spell, this spell will cause a group of Elementals to join the caster.
\par 
\par \b Charm Humanoid\tab 
\par \plain\fs20 Base Level: 4\tab Guilds: Mag
\par Required Stats: 16 Int, 16 Wis, 18 Cha\tab 
\par \i COMBAT Spell, will cause 4 Monsters in 1 Group to be Charmed.\tab 
\par \plain\fs20 One of the most useful binding spells, depending on the power of the caster and the resistance of the target, one can befriend almost any humanoid with this magic.
\par \pard\li175 
\par \b Charm Undead\tab 
\par \plain\fs20 Base Level: 5\tab Guilds: Mag
\par Required Stats: 15 Int, 17 Wis, 10 Cha\tab 
\par \i COMBAT Spell, will cause 4 Monsters in 1 Group to be Charmed.\tab 
\par \plain\fs20 Unlike the other charm spells that affect the living, this spell affects the Undead and attempts to magically bind them to the caster.
\par 
\par \b Charm Giant\tab 
\par \plain\fs20 Base Level: 5\tab Guilds: Mag
\par Required Stats: 15 Int, 15 Wis, 16 Cha\tab 
\par \i COMBAT Spell, will cause 4 Monsters in 1 Group to be Charmed.\tab 
\par \plain\fs20 A more advanced version of Charm Humanoid, this spell will affect only Giants and attempt to bind them to the caster.
\par \pard\li175 
\par \b Bind Animal
\par \plain\fs20 Base Level: 5\tab Guilds: Mag
\par Required Stats: 13 Int, 17 Wis, 10 Cha\tab 
\par \i COMBAT Spell, will cause 4 Monsters in 1 Group to be Charmed.\tab 
\par \plain\fs20 A more advanced version of Charm Animal.  Depending on the power of the caster and the resistance of the target, one can befriend almost any animal with this magic.
\par 
\par \b Charm Monster\tab 
\par \plain\fs20 Base Level: 6\tab Guilds: Mag
\par Required Stats: 12 Int, 17 Wis, 10 Cha\tab 
\par \i COMBAT Spell, will cause 4 Monsters in 1 Group to be Charmed.\tab 
\par \pard\li175 \plain\fs20 This spell attempts to Charm creatures that no other charm-specific spell will work on.
\par 
\par \b Bind Elemental\tab 
\par \plain\fs20 Base Level: 6\tab Guilds: Mag
\par Required Stats: 15 Int, 15 Wis, 12 Cha\tab 
\par \i COMBAT Spell, will cause 4 Monsters in 1 Group to be Charmed.\tab 
\par \plain\fs20 This spell is a more advanced version of Charm Elemental, Binding the more powerful of these creatures to the caster.
\par 
\par \b Charm Dragon\tab 
\par \plain\fs20 Base Level: 7\tab Guilds: Mag
\par Required Stats: 18 Int, 18 Wis, 18 Cha\tab 
\par \i COMBAT Spell, will cause 4 Monsters in 1 Group to be Charmed.\tab 
\par \pard\li175 \plain\fs20 Requiring strict concentration, this spell will attempt to bind one or more dragons to the caster.  Be warned that if the spell fails, the targets tend to respond adversely.
\par 
\par \b Dominate Demon\tab 
\par \plain\fs20 Base Level: 8\tab Guilds: Mag
\par Required Stats: 15 Int, 17 Wis, 12 Con, 17 Cha\tab 
\par \i COMBAT Spell, will cause 4 Monsters in 1 Group to be Charmed.\tab 
\par \plain\fs20 Old magic derived from Demonology, this spell uses the powers of the earth to bind a Demon to the caster for an unknown period of time.
\par \pard\li175 
\par \b Dominate Devil\tab 
\par \plain\fs20 Base Level: 8\tab Guilds: Mag
\par Required Stats: 15 Int, 18 Wis, 12 Con, 18 Cha\tab 
\par \i COMBAT Spell, will cause 4 Monsters in 1 Group to be Charmed.\tab 
\par \plain\fs20 The more advanced magic of control, this spell attempts to bind one or more devils and keep them with the caster by using the powers from the dark elements
\par 
\par \b Dominate Humanoid\tab 
\par \plain\fs20 Base Level: 8\tab Guilds: Mag
\par Required Stats: 16 Int, 16 Wis,  16 Cha\tab 
\par \i COMBAT Spell, will cause 4 humanoids in 1 Group to be Charmed.\tab 
\par \pard\li175 \plain\fs20 This will put humanoids well under the Charm of the caster. Like other Dominate spells, it is among the most difficult to break.
\par 
\par \b Dominate Giant\tab 
\par \plain\fs20 Base Level: 10\tab Guilds: Mag
\par Required Stats: 18 Int, 18 Wis,  18 Cha\tab 
\par \i COMBAT Spell, will cause 4 giants in 1 Group to be Charmed.\tab 
\par \plain\fs20 This will affect giants with the same potency of  advanced Charm that constitutes the Dominate class of spells.
\par 
\par \b Soul Entrapment\tab 
\par \plain\fs20 Base Level: 12\tab Guilds: Mag
\par Required Stats: 18 Int, 21 Wis, 18 Con, 22 Cha\tab 
\par \pard\li175 \i COMBAT Spell, will cause 4 Monsters in 1 Group to be Charmed.\tab 
\par \plain\fs20 The most advanced of all charm spells, only a master Mage has the ability to cast this magic and Charm any creature, living or not.
\par \fs24 
\par \pard \i\fs20\cf2 Move to the next section to read about Bind Spells.
\par Move to the previous section to read about Kill Spells.
\par \page
{\up +}
{\up $}
\pard\keepn {\up #}
\plain\b\fs28 Cold Spells\plain\fs24 
\par \pard 
\par \fs20 After mastering Fire, the Sorcerers guild sought to prevent rivals from having an equaling force and quickly moved to master the element of coldness so that both Fire and Cold were controlled by one group. The effectiveness of these spells depends on the experience of the caster and the Cold Resistance of the target.
\par \fs24 
\par \pard\li175 \b\fs20 Cold Blast\tab 
\par \plain\fs20 Base Level: 2\tab Guilds: Sor
\par Required Stats: 12 Int, 9 Wis, 9 Dex\tab 
\par \i COMBAT Spell, will cause 4 Monsters in 2 Groups to be Frozen.\tab 
\par \plain\fs20 This simple spell creates a blast of air that is cold enough to kill most small creatures.
\par 
\par \b Ice Spray\tab 
\par \plain\fs20 Base Level: 5\tab Guilds: Sor
\par Required Stats: 16 Int, 8 Wis, 9 Dex\tab 
\par \i COMBAT Spell, will cause 6 Monsters in 3 Groups to be Frozen.\tab 
\par \plain\fs20 This spell creates a wall of ice and blasts it towards the opponents.  The wave of liquid ice will almost certainly freeze the victim instantly.
\par \pard\li175 
\par \b Hail Storm\tab 
\par \plain\fs20 Base Level: 8\tab Guilds: Sor
\par Required Stats: 19 Int, 18 Wis, 12 Dex\tab 
\par \i COMBAT Spell, will cause 8 Monsters in 4 Groups to be Frozen.\tab 
\par \plain\fs20 A more advanced spell, casting this will create a storm of magical hail that crushes and  smothers its victims, attempting to freeze and shatter them.
\par 
\par \b Arctic Storm\tab 
\par \plain\fs20 Base Level: 12\tab Guilds: Sor
\par Required Stats: 21 Int, 20 Wis, 18 Dex\tab 
\par \i COMBAT Spell, will cause 12 Monsters in 4 Groups to be Frozen.\tab 
\par \pard\li175 \plain\fs20 The spell most feared by fire creatures, the storm that is invoked is a collection of all other cold spells, and is so intense that very few can survive.\fs24 
\par \pard \fs20 
\par \i\cf2 Move to the next section to read about Electrical Spells.
\par Move to the previous section to read about Fire Spells.
\par \page
{\up +}
{\up $}
{\up #}
\pard\keepn \plain\b\fs28 Commands\plain\fs24 
\par \pard 
\par \fs20 Below is a list of available commands in Mordor.  They are broken up into two sections.  Game Commands and Dungeon Commands.  Game commands will work in both the City and the Dungeon (any time).  Dungeon Commands will work only in the dungeon.  Dungeon Commands will also specify whether or not they are Combat or Non-Combat.
\par 
\par \b\cf1 Game Commands\plain\fs24 
\par \pard\li355\tx1435\tx4315 \fs20 F1\tab HelpLesson
\par F2\tab Area Look (User List of Area)
\par F3\tab Character Stats Information
\par F4\tab Resistance Information
\par F5\tab Experience Information
\par F6\tab Character Information
\par F7\tab Guild/Abilities Information
\par F9\tab Buffer Information
\par F10\tab Game Options
\par F11\tab Toolbar Toggle
\par 
\par a\tab Ask character to Join
\par e\tab Equip Item (currently selected item)
\par d\tab Drop Item (currently selected item)
\par i\tab Item Info (currently selected item)
\par g\tab Give Item/Gold\fs24 
\par \pard\li355\tx1435\tx4385\tx5825 \fs20 p\tab Pickup Body
\par l\tab Drop Body
\par s\tab Swap Items\fs24 
\par \pard\li355\tx1435\tx4315 
\par \pard 
\par \pard\li175\tx1435\tx4315 \b\fs20 Tab Keys\plain\fs24 
\par \pard\li355 \i\fs20\cf2 Unlike standard Windows Tabbed Dialog Boxes, you must use the CTRL key to access the tabs in Mordor (see below).  The reason for this is so the user can access a specific tab from any window in the game.
\par \plain\fs24 
\par \pard\li355\tx1435\tx4315 \i\fs20 Character Window\plain\fs24 
\par \fs20 CTRL-l\tab Look in Room Tab
\par CTRL-b\tab Buffers Tab\fs24 
\par \fs20 CTRL-m\tab Miscellaneous Tab
\par CTRL-s\tab Character Stats Tab
\par CTRL-r\tab Resistances Tab
\par CTRL-c\tab Character Info Tab
\par CTRL-g\tab Guild Info Tab\fs24 
\par \fs20 
\par \i Objects & Spells Window\plain\fs24 
\par \fs20 CTRL-i\tab Items Tab
\par CTRL-p\tab Spells Tab
\par CTRL-o\tab Companions Tab\fs24 
\par 
\par \pard\li175\tx1435\tx4315 \b\fs20 Party Keys\plain\fs24 
\par \pard\li355\tx1435\tx4315 \fs20 n\tab Select next Character\fs24 
\par \fs20 ALT-s\tab Switch to Character (updates all windows)\fs24 
\par \fs20 ALT-o\tab Party Options
\par ALT-l\tab Ask character to leave\fs24 
\par \pard\li355 \fs20 ALT-1-4\tab Switch to character\fs24 
\par \pard\li355\tx1435\tx4315 \fs20 ALT-p\tab Pool party's on-hand gold to current character
\par \fs24 
\par \pard\li175\tx1435\tx4315 \b\fs20 Automap Keys\plain\fs24 
\par \pard\li355\tx1435\tx4315 \fs20 F8\tab View AutoMap\fs24 
\par \fs20 <\tab Display Previous Automap Level
\par >\tab Display Next Automap Level
\par \fs24 
\par \pard\li175\tx1435\tx4315 \b\fs20 General Keys\plain\fs24 
\par \pard\li355\tx1435\tx4315 \fs20 ESC\tab Backout (of a Dialog Box, Text Box, etc.)\fs24 
\par \pard\li355 
\par \pard\li175\tx1435\tx4315 \b\fs20 Miscellaneous Keys\plain\fs24 
\par \pard\li355\tx1435\tx4315 \fs20 SHIFT-F6\tab Outputs current character stats, statistics and information to CHARSTAT.TXT (in the Root Mordor directory)\fs24 
\par \pard\li355 \fs20 
\par 
\par \b\cf2 You can also hit CTRL-<letter> to switch to any Character Window Tab or Item Window tab anytime in the game (i.e. Ctrl-P to switch to the Spells Tab of the Items Window)!\plain\fs24 
\par \pard \b\fs20\cf2 
\par \cf1 Dungeon Commands\plain\fs24 
\par \pard\li355\tx1435\tx4385\tx5825 \fs20 f\tab Fight\tab Combat
\par d\tab Drop\tab Non-Combat
\par d\tab Defend\tab Combat
\par c\tab Cast Spell\tab Non/Combat
\par o\tab Open Chest\tab Non/Combat
\par 1-4\tab Select Monster Group\tab Combat
\par U\tab Use Item (currently sel. item)\tab Non/Combat
\par t\tab Take Stairs, Chute, etc.\tab Non/Combat
\par j\tab Allow monster(s) to join\tab Combat
\par <space>\tab Stop fighting, opening, etc.\tab Combat
\par 
\par Shift 0-9\tab Cast Spell or Use Item in Buffer\tab Non/Combat\fs24 
\par \pard\li355\tx1435\tx4315 \fs20 
\par \fs24 
\par \pard \fs20 In general, the ESC key is for backing out of selections made during combat.  For example, say that during combat, you hit \'91c\'92 and then ESC, focus will be returned to the Main Dungeon Window.  \fs24 
\par \fs20 
\par It\'92s highly recommended that one uses the buffers - they will definitely help in speeding up the casting of spell and the using of items during combat.
\par \fs24 
\par \fs20 A player also has the ability of \'91clicking\'92 on certain locations of the Main Dungeon Window to carry out a command.  The locations and linked keys are as follows:
\par \pard 
\par \b\cf1 Click Commands\plain\fs24 
\par \pard\li355 \fs20 Monster Label\tab \tab (Same as \'911-4\'92)
\par Companion Name Label\tab Name a Companion\fs24 
\par \pard \fs20 
\par \b\cf1 Double Click Commands\plain\fs24 
\par \pard\li355 \fs20 Automap\tab \tab \tab Either Resets or Resizes the Automap
\par Party Character\tab \tab Switch all windows to Character
\par Companion Picture\tab \tab Get Companion Stats
\par Item in Items Tab\tab \tab Use the Item
\par Spell in Spell Book\tab \tab Cast the Spell
\par Buffer Entry\tab \tab \tab Cast Spell/Use Item in Buffer
\par \fs24 
\par \pard \b\fs20\cf1 Right Click Commands\plain\fs24 
\par \pard\li355 \fs20 Companion Picture\tab \tab Attack Companion
\par Automap\tab \tab \tab Redraw/Refresh Level\fs24 
\par \pard \fs20 
\par \i\cf2 Move to the next section to read the Control Panel.
\par Move to the previous section to read about Parties.
\par \page
{\up +}
{\up $}
{\up #}
\pard\keepn \plain\b\fs28 Companions\plain\fs24 
\par \pard 
\par \fs20 Companions can play a very important role when fighting.  A character that is by themselves will always be the sole target of every monster they encounter.  However, a character with a group of companions can even out the odds during combat by having the attacking monsters split their attention between the character and companions.  Also, having a group of bloodthirsty monsters fighting for you can be helpful.  When a monster becomes a companion, it can use its abilities (i.e. breathe fire, stone, spit acid, cast spells) against the group of monsters a character is fighting, and if a companion kills a monster your character is quested for, you will get full credit for the kill.  The only real disadvantage to having companions is that some of them can be rather greedy when sharing the treasure after the fight, and there\'92s always the chance that a bound companion may turn on its master.  Another disadvantage is if two or more characters form a party and each have their own companions, quite often the companions can become disoriented during battle and attack a party member!
\par \pard 
\par To find out the current information on a companion, double-click on the companions picture in the Companions Tab, located in the Objects & Spells window.  A player can also drag and drop the companion into the store by dragging the picture of a companion.
\par 
\par Companions cannot be traded between characters and only a companion's master can heal or resurrect a companion.
\par \fs24 
\par \i\fs20\cf1 Charming & Binding Companions\plain\fs24 
\par \fs20 Unless a creature offers to join a character, the only other way for an explorer to gain companions is by the use of magic (usually either a Charm spell or an Item), which binds a companion against their will to serve the character.  When an adventurer does acquire companions, the initial spell used will \'91bind\'92 the creature at a certain level.  Depending on this level (and the level of the character), the monster may break free and either leave or turn on the character and attack.  The lower the \'91bind level\'92, the higher the chance of the creature breaking free.  Also, the lower the bind level, the easier it is for a creature to weaken the binding.
\par \pard 
\par It is almost impossible for low level characters to regulate high level monsters, even with the most powerful spells.  The true power of companion regulation comes with experience and guild levels.
\par 
\par If a binding level reaches 0, the creature will always break free.
\par 
\par \i\cf1 Increasing Bind Levels
\par \plain\fs20 A character can increase (fortify) the bind level of a companion by either casting a Bind spell (i.e. Mages can cast \i Control\plain\fs20 , \i Bind\plain\fs20  and \i Domination\plain\fs20 ), using an item, or using the Bind services in the Holding & Confinement store.  A creature with a high Bind Level in the hands of an experienced character is very unlikely to break free.
\par \pard 
\par As mentioned above, the level of binding inflicted on a companion during charming or refortification is dependent on the level of the spell and the level of the character casting the spell.
\par 
\par \fs24 
\par \b\fs20\cf1 Combat & Companions\plain\fs24 
\par \fs20 Having four companions for a single character is a great idea.  However, when two or more characters get together and each character has one or more companions, things can get confusing in battle, which can quite often result in a companion mistaking a character (and any companions they may have) as an enemy group and attack!  This can be especially dangerous with powerful magic users and fire-breathing creatures.  The possibility of a companion mistaking another character in the party and their companions for the enemy is based on the companion's experience (or character equivalent) level, which varies from creature to creature.  Creatures on the upper levels will usually have little experience in picking out the enemy and hit other party members more often while creatures from the lower levels will be much more advanced and experience, and can tell the difference between a party member and an enemy in the middle of combat.
\par \pard 
\par The more bodies there are in combat, the better the chance that another party member (and their companions) will be mistaken for the enemy.  It's recommended that a total 'body' count for an adventuring group never exceeds 6.
\par 
\par Any player who organizes a party of four characters with each character having four companions is going to have a real bad day - especially if some of the companions can cast high level spells or can stone their targets!!
\par 
\par \fs24 
\par \b\fs20\cf1 Handling Companions\plain\fs24 
\par \pard 
\par \i\fs20\cf1 How dedicated are your companions?\plain\fs24 
\par \fs20 Monsters that offer to join are about 50% of the time dedicated to staying with the character (provided the character heals and tends to the creature as necessary).  The other 50% are just looking for some fun and could leave when they get bored or too beat up.  Keep in mind that even very dedicated companions will leave if they are hurting too bad and you don\'92t heal them.
\par 
\par Monsters that join the character free of will are different from bound companions in the sense that they cannot be re-bound and will not attack the character when/if they leave.
\par \pard \fs24 
\par \i\fs20\cf1 Regulating companions & dealing with surprise attacks\plain\fs24 
\par \fs20 There is a good chance that if a bound companion breaks free of their master that they will turn and attack (quite often taking other weakly bound companions with them).  This is all dependent on the alignment of the creature versus the alignment of the character (oppositely aligned creatures will always attack), and whether or not the creature is afraid of the character.  Evil creatures tend to attack any character when they break free.
\par \pard 
\par It is strongly recommended that a character does not take on a companion that is significantly more powerful than themselves, since there is always the slight possibility that the companion could break free of binding and surprise attack the character and/or the party.
\par 
\par \cf2 One can also select to attack their companion by right-clicking on the companions picture.\plain\fs24 
\par 
\par \i\fs20\cf1 Naming your Companions\plain\fs24 
\par \fs20 To make things a little more personal between a character and their companions, one can assign a Name to their companions by clicking on the label that holds the companion name.
\par \pard \fs24 
\par \i\fs20\cf1 Learning about your Companions\plain\fs24 
\par \fs20 Another major advantage to having a monster as a companion is that it gives the character time to learn about the monster, its abilities, strengths and weaknesses.  A character with a good ID skill (combined Intelligence, Wisdom and Guild Level) can usually deduce almost all information about a companion, using it to their advantage if they have to end up fighting that type of monster.  Characters with a low ID skill won\'92t be able to learn very much about their companions and will probably have to end up using the ID features of the Holding & Confinement store in the City.
\par \pard \fs24 
\par \i\fs20\cf1 Healing & Resurrecting your Companions\plain\fs24 
\par \fs20 One can heal their companions by either casting a heal spell from the Spell Book, or using an Item that casts a spell.  Characters cannot heal the companions of other character in the party, since most other characters companions are only partial to their \'91master\'92 or \'91friend\'92.  A companion that is hurt will be able to break a binding level much easier, or become very restless.
\par 
\par One can also raise their companions from the dead while in the dungeon with standard resurrect spells.
\par \pard \fs24 
\par \i\fs20\cf1 Moving & Reorganizing your Companions\plain\fs24 
\par \fs20 You can move and reorganize your companions by dragging and dropping the companion picture onto another companion slot.  This allows the player to place stronger companions in front, and weaker (or spell-casting) companions in the back.
\par \fs24 
\par \i\fs20\cf1 Selling your Companions\plain\fs24 
\par \fs20 One advantage to collecting companions is the ability to Sell them in the city for profit.  Holding and Confinement will pay handsome prices for powerful creatures.  On the flip side, the more powerful creatures are harder to contain and regulate than the lower, weaker ones.
\par \pard 
\par There are only two ways to get a completely identified monster in the library: either have it as a companion and study it, or take the creature to the Holding & Confinement store and have then identify it for you.
\par 
\par Only one spell-casting companion will be able to cast a spell each round.
\par 
\par A character can obtain companions by casting a "charm\'94 spell, using an item that casts a "charm\'94 spell, or allowing monsters to \'91j\'92oin (if they offer).
\par 
\par \i\cf2 Move to the next section to read about Dying.
\par \pard Move to the previous section to read about Monsters and Treasure.
\par 
\par \page
{\up +}
{\up $}
{\up #}
\pard\keepn \plain\b\fs28 Control Panel\plain\fs24 
\par \pard 
\par \fs20 \{bmc bm0.bmp\}
\par 
\par A character can access the Control Panel by Pressing F10 in either the City or Dungeon.  From here, you can set various options.
\par 
\par \b\cf1 Available options\plain\fs24 
\par \pard\li175 \i\fs20\cf1 Hide\plain\fs24 
\par \fs20 Setting this option to True will make it so that no other character\'92s can pick you up and carry you anywhere.
\par \fs24 
\par \i\fs20\cf1 Preload Character\plain\fs24 
\par \fs20 If you select this option, the character will be automatically loaded (without verification of the password) the next time Mordor is started.
\par \fs24 
\par \i\fs20\cf1 No Perception Msg.\plain\fs24 
\par \fs20 Selecting this option will disable any perception messages (i.e. "You are pretty sure you are standing on an Anti-Magic square\'94) while you are walking through the dungeon.
\par \pard\li175 \fs24 
\par \i\fs20\cf1 Auto Change Lev.\plain\fs24 
\par \fs20 Turning this on will cause the Automap to automatically update the map to reflect what level the character is always on (if character is not lost).\fs24 
\par \pard 
\par \pard\li175 \i\fs20\cf1 No Party Sound\plain\fs24 
\par \fs20 Selecting this will disable all background combat sounds (from other characters and companions in the party).\fs24 
\par \pard \fs20 
\par \b\cf1 Available Functions\plain\fs24 
\par \pard\li175 \i\fs20\cf1 Window Control\plain\fs24 
\par \fs20 With this section, a player can reset the size of one or all windows back to the original size.  One can also resize (adjust) windows to match the current resolution by clicking on the Adjust to Display button.
\par \fs24 
\par \i\fs20\cf1 Game Options\plain\fs24 
\par \fs20 This will display the Game Options screen, allowing the user to set volume, etc.\fs24 
\par \pard \fs20 
\par 
\par \i\cf2 Move to the next section to read the Hints & Tips.
\par Move to the previous section to read about Commands.
\par 
\par \page
{\up +}
{\up $}
{\up #}
\pard\keepn \plain\b\fs28 Creating a Character\plain\fs24 
\par \pard 
\par \fs20 \{bml bm1.bmp\}When you select Create Character from the Main Menu, the window to the left will appear.  It is fairly self-explanatory.  In order to save a Character, you must select a Name and a Race.  On the right hand side of the window are your character\'92s statistics.  You can modify these by clicking on the adjuster (up and down) arrows to the right of the stat box.  The amount of extra "points\'94 you have to disperse to your character\'92s stats are shown below the stats.
\par \pard 
\par On the right side of the Create Character Window is a section that shows you what Guilds the character is currently capable of joining (with the selected Race).  \b Bold\plain\fs20  represent guilds your character can join given the selected stats, race and alignment. Guilds that are not in Bold represent those guilds which your selected race and alignment can join, but not with your current stats.  Guilds that are in \i Italic\plain\fs20  represent those guilds that your selected race can join, but not with your selected alignment (either Good, Neutral or Evil).
\par \pard This window is only for creation purposes.  With some guilds, a starting character just can\'92t select the stats to join (the requirements for stats are too high) - the way to join these guilds is to create the character, run around as a Nomad (or another guild) until you find enough items to raise your stats to the minimum requirements of the guild.
\par 
\par Once you\'92ve chosen your Name, Race, Alignment, Sex and Stats, you can then save your character and start playing.
\par \fs24 
\par \b\fs20\cf1 Passwords\plain\fs24 
\par \pard \fs20 Even though the game will prompt you for a password when you create a character, if you do not wish one, simply press ENTER twice.  This will allow you (or anybody else on the computer) to run the character without requiring a password.  If you change your mind later, you can always change your character's password!  Also remember that \b passwords in Mordor are case sensitive!\plain\fs20   If you do enter a password for you character,  be sure you remember it or write it down somewhere.
\par \pard \fs24 
\par \i\fs20\cf1 If you wish, you can click on the "Tutorial\'94 button for a basic walk-through on creating a character, buying items, and encountering your first monster(s).  For beginners, this is recommended.\plain\fs24 
\par \fs20 
\par \i\cf2 Move to the next section to read about the Game Screen.
\par Move to the previous section to read about Race Statistics.
\par 
\par \page
{\up +}
{\up $}
{\up #}
\pard\keepn \plain\b\fs28 Damage Spells\plain\fs24 
\par \pard 
\par \fs20 The creation of these spells came about by accident as one Healer realized that their healing magic could be turned to inflict harm.  Spells of this type are excellent combative/defensive spells that can instantly kill victims just as easily as the originals can be used to heal.  The effectiveness of these spells depends on the experience level of the caster and the Magic Resistance of the target.
\par \fs24 
\par \pard\li175 \b\fs20 Cause Wounds
\par \plain\fs20 Base Level: 2\tab Guilds: Wiz, Hea
\par Required Stats: 11 Int, 11 Wis, 8 Con, 11 Dex\tab 
\par \i COMBAT Spell, will cause 4 Monsters in 2 Groups to be Killed.\tab 
\par \plain\fs20 When cast, this spell attempts to rupture the internal and external tissues of the target(s) and kill them.
\par 
\par \b Cause Heavy Wounds
\par \plain\fs20 Base Level: 4\tab Guilds: Wiz, Hea
\par Required Stats: 12 Int, 13 Wis, 10 Con, 12 Dex\tab 
\par \i COMBAT Spell, will cause 6 Monsters in 4 Groups to be Killed.\tab 
\par \plain\fs20 An advanced form of Cause Wounds, this spell not only attempts to rupture the tissues of the designated targets with more force, it also attempts to implode the victim as well by bursting the organs.
\par \pard\li175 
\par \b Power
\par \plain\fs20 Base Level: 5\tab Guilds: Wiz (6), Hea
\par Required Stats: 15 Int, 15 Wis, 12 Con, 15 Dex\tab 
\par \i COMBAT Spell, will cause 6 Monsters in 4 Groups to be Killed.\tab 
\par \plain\fs20 Not much is known about how this spell functions, but it causes the life force of the targets to be yanked from their bodies.
\par 
\par \b Harm
\par \plain\fs20 Base Level: 6\tab Guilds: Wiz (7), Hea
\par Required Stats: 17 Int, 16 Wis, 13 Con, 16 Dex\tab 
\par \i COMBAT Spell, will cause 7 Monsters in 4 Groups to be Killed.\tab 
\par \plain\fs20 A more devastating form of Power that functions slightly differently; this spell drains the life force of its victims and feeds it to the earth.
\par \pard\li175 
\par \b Draining Touch
\par \plain\fs20 Base Level: 6\tab Guilds: Wiz (7), Hea
\par Required Stats: 17 Int, 17 Wis, 12 Con, 14 Dex\tab 
\par \i COMBAT Spell, will cause 1 Monsters in 1 Groups to be Drained.\tab 
\par \plain\fs20 A deadly spell, when invoked and the caster touches the designated target, their life force is usually drained into the ground, leaving a lifeless shell.
\par 
\par \b Cause Fatal Wounds
\par \plain\fs20 Base Level: 7\tab Guilds: Wiz (8), Hea
\par Required Stats: 17 Int, 17 Wis, 14 Con, 16 Dex\tab 
\par \i COMBAT Spell, will cause 9 Monsters in 4 Groups to be Killed.\tab 
\par \pard\li175 \plain\fs20 This hideous spell causes the bones of the designated targets to explode,  causing instant death.
\par 
\par \b Word of Death
\par \plain\fs20 Base Level: 12\tab Guilds: Wiz (15), Hea
\par Required Stats: 21 Int, 21 Wis, 18 Con, 21 Dex\tab 
\par \i COMBAT Spell, will cause 14 Monsters in 4 Groups to be Killed.\tab 
\par \plain\fs20 One of the most feared magic spells in the world since there are few known resistances, Word of Death, which is known by only the most advanced spell casters, calls upon the wrath of Nardun, the God of Pain, and asks him to dispose of the caster\'92s targets.  When summoned in full, it is said that Nardun can never be overcome.\fs24 
\par \pard \fs20 
\par \i\cf2 Move to the next section to read about Element Spells.
\par Move to the previous section to read about Mind Spells.
\par \page
{\up +}
{\up $}
{\up #}
\pard\keepn \plain\b\fs28 Dispell Spells\plain\fs24 
\par \pard 
\par \fs20 These types of spells were actually created in the beginning by the Healer\'92s guild to banish any poor soul that a resurrect failed upon, turning the victim into the walking dead.  Now since the Resurrect spells have been mastered and no longer produce these results, the study of this class turned towards defending one\'92s self from any undead creatures that posed a threat.  The effectiveness of these spells depends on the casters experience and the Magic Resistance of the monster.
\par \pard \fs24 
\par \pard\li175 \b\fs20 Dispel Undead\tab 
\par \plain\fs20 Base Level: 3\tab Guilds: Wiz, Hea
\par Required Stats: 9 Int, 12 Wis, 6 Con\tab 
\par \i COMBAT Spell, will cause 8 Monsters in 4 Groups to be Dispelled.\tab 
\par \plain\fs20 A useful spell when attacked by undead, any targets affected by this spell will instantly break down and become dust . 
\par  
\par \b Dispel Elemental\tab 
\par \plain\fs20 Base Level: 4\tab Guilds: Wiz, Hea
\par Required Stats: 15 Int, 15 Wis, 15 Con, 17 Cha\tab 
\par \i COMBAT Spell, will cause 8 Monsters in 4 Groups to be Dispelled.\tab 
\par \pard\li175 \plain\fs20 Even though the true nature of most Elemental creatures is unknown, this spell is said to act much like Dispel Undead whereas it breaks apart the Elemental targets and turns them to back into the elements from which they were formed. \tab 
\par 
\par \b Abolish Undead\tab 
\par \plain\fs20 Base Level: 8\tab Guilds: Wiz, Hea
\par Required Stats: 16 Int, 18 Wis, 18 Con, 12 Dex\tab 
\par \i COMBAT Spell, will cause 4 Monsters in 2 Groups to be Dispelled.\tab 
\par \plain\fs20 The most advanced Dispell spell ever devised, the magic induced when invoked is so great that it usually annihilates all targets.  The only drawback is that the magic is usually too focused to affect a large number of targets.\fs24 
\par \pard \fs20 
\par \i\cf2 Move to the next section to read about Resistant Spells.
\par Move to the previous section to read about Banish Spells.
\par \page
{\up +}
{\up $}
{\up #}
\pard\keepn \plain\fs24 
\par \b\fs28 Dying\line
\plain\i\fs22\cf3 \'93If an individual can be found in one piece and services can be paid, Death is only an inconvenience.\'94\plain\fs24 
\par \i\fs22\cf3 \tab - \b \'93Marlow\'94, Local Morgueworker\plain\fs24 
\par 
\par \pard 
\par \fs20 Isn\'92t half as serious as it sounds.  Since Magic is available in Mordor, so is life after death.  However, under most circumstances, it will cost a character.  The most common way of dying is in combat - either being outright torn to pieces or blown away by a spell.  If your character dies, you can either be raised by another character (who uses some sort of raise dead spell), carried to the morgue and raised, or wait for rescue.  Keep in mind, however, that being raised by the morgue will quite often cost 1 point of constitution and a good amount of money.
\par \pard 
\par \b\cf1 Dealing with Death\plain\fs24 
\par \pard\li175 \fs20 When a character dies, they have the option of waiting for another character to come and get them, or wait for a rescue party to show up.  On the upper levels, waiting for a rescue party usually doesn\'92t take too long, but as you venture deeper into the dungeon, it\'92s better to rely on your other characters to help out.\fs24 
\par \pard 
\par \pard\qc \i\fs20\cf2 The main disadvantage to waiting for rescuers is that your character will age in the process.  Sometimes just days, but on the lower levels, it can take MUCH longer \line
(months, and even years)!\plain\fs24 
\par \pard 
\par \pard\li175 \fs20 Once a character is in the morgue, or has a form of resurrect cast on them by another character, they have the option of accepting the raise and living once again.\fs24 
\par \pard \fs20 
\par \b\cf1 Complications\plain\fs24 
\par \pard\li175 \fs20 When a raise fails on a character, they are usually laid back to rest as they were before the raise was initiated.  However, sometimes things get out of hand as one tries to lay the character back to rest, and much like an experiment gone wrong, the character is suddenly yanked back into the living with much of their life force drained away.  When this happens, it's known as 'complications'.  The chance of complications is based on the age of the character compared to the maximum age of the characters race.  This means that a younger character has a less chance of getting complications than an older character.  When complications occur, they can leave your character drained of life and stats, so be careful when accepting a raise - make sure the percentage of success is worth the risk.\fs24 
\par \pard 
\par \b\fs20\cf1 Rocked Characters\plain\fs24 
\par \pard\li175\tx265 \fs20 Rocked characters are BAD news.  One can only rock characters by casting a movement spell (i.e. teleport, ethereal portal) that lands a character (or party) in solid rock.  Once a character has been embedded in solid rock, only the \i Retrieve Soul\plain\fs20  spell can grab them out of the rock.  After that, only the \i Resurrect\plain\fs20  spell can bring them back from the dead.  Unfortunately, Rocked characters will always have complications.
\par 
\par Rocked characters are different from Stoned characters, which require the \i Restore Flesh\plain\fs20  spell to be resurrected.\fs24 
\par \pard\tx265 \fs20 
\par \b\cf1 Getting too old\plain\fs24 
\par \pard\li175\tx265 \fs20 As your character gets near its maximum age, there is a slight chance that they may die of old age.  The only known way around old age is by magical items that are said to lower the actual age of a character.\fs24 
\par \pard\li175 
\par \pard 
\par \pard\tx265 \b\fs20\cf1 Getting Items & Gold from Dead Characters\plain\fs24 
\par \pard\li175\tx265 \fs20 The only way to get items or gold from a Dead character is to use the Exchange Items feature from the Main Menu.  Both characters must be in the same place in order to complete an exchange!\fs24 
\par \pard\li175 
\par \pard \i\fs20\cf2 Move to the next section to read about Parties.
\par Move to the previous section to read about Companions.
\par \page
{\up +}
{\up $}
{\up #}
\pard\keepn \plain\b\fs28 Electrical Spells\plain\fs24 
\par \pard 
\par \fs20 After discovering the destructive force of this element, the Sorcerer Masters went to work on controlling this strange element that they didn\'92t understand.  For decades, they worked to make spells of this class controllable, and in the end succeeded.  The effectiveness of these spells depends on the experience of the caster and the Electrical Resistance of the target.
\par \fs24 
\par \pard\li175 \b\fs20 Shock\tab 
\par \plain\fs20 Base Level: 1\tab Guilds: Sor
\par Required Stats: 12 Int, 9 Dex\tab 
\par \i COMBAT Spell, will cause 2 Monsters in 2 Groups to be Shocked.\tab 
\par \plain\fs20 This basic spell creates an electrical arc from the caster's hands to the designated targets, attempting to instantly electrify and kill them.
\par 
\par \b Lightning Bolt\tab 
\par \plain\fs20 Base Level: 3\tab Guilds: Sor
\par Required Stats: 14 Int, 9 Wis, 9 Dex\tab 
\par \i COMBAT Spell, will cause 4 Monsters in 2 Groups to be Electrocuted.\tab 
\par \plain\fs20 Summoning the power of the storm, this spell pulls electricity from the ground and blasts it into the midst of one\'92s targets.
\par \pard\li175 
\par \b ThunderBolt\tab 
\par \plain\fs20 Base Level: 6\tab Guilds: Sor
\par Required Stats: 16 Int, 10 Wis, 12 Dex\tab 
\par \i COMBAT Spell, will cause 6 Monsters in 3 Groups to be Electrocuted.\tab 
\par \plain\fs20 A more advanced form of Lightning Bolt, this spell  triples the damage and affects more targets.
\par 
\par \b Static Mesh\tab 
\par \plain\fs20 Base Level: 7\tab Guilds: Sor
\par Required Stats: 18 Int, 10 Wis, 12 Dex\tab 
\par \i COMBAT Spell, will cause 7 Monsters in 4 Groups to be Electrocuted.\tab 
\par \plain\fs20 Very little is understood about this spell, which creates an   electrical mesh in the middle of one\'92s targets and explodes into an electrocuting fury.
\par \pard\li175 
\par \b Electric Field\tab 
\par \plain\fs20 Base Level: 11\tab Guilds: Sor
\par Required Stats: 17 Int, 12 Wis, 12 Dex\tab 
\par \i COMBAT Spell, will cause 12 Monsters in 4 Groups to be Electrocuted.\tab 
\par \plain\fs20 The most devastating of electrical spells, very few creatures can withstand the shock delivered from this white-hot field of electricity.\fs24 
\par \pard \fs20 
\par \i\cf2 Move to the next section to read about Mind Spells.
\par Move to the previous section to read about Cold Spells.
\par \page
{\up +}
{\up $}
{\up #}
\pard\keepn \plain\b\fs28 Element Spells\plain\fs24 
\par \pard 
\par \fs20 In the Sorcerer\'92s continued study of destruction, which included the study of Acid, Disease and Poisons, birthed spells of the Element type.  Deadly in nature, these spells affect many monsters that other magics cannot affect.  The type of resistance associated with these spells can also vary depending on the spell.
\par \fs24 
\par \pard\li175 \b\fs20 Poison
\par \plain\fs20 Base Level: 2\tab Guilds: Vil (6), Sor, Hea
\par Required Stats: 10 Int, 10 Wis, 9 Con, 14 Dex\tab 
\par \i COMBAT Spell, will cause 4 Monsters in 2 Groups to be Choked.\tab 
\par \plain\fs20 This useful spell introduces a deadly poison into the system of the casters targets. This fast-acting toxin causes paralysis of the respiratory system, asphyxiating even the strongest creatures.
\par 
\par \b Leprosy
\par \plain\fs20 Base Level: 4\tab Guilds: Vil (12), Sor, Hea
\par Required Stats: 12 Int, 12 Wis, 12 Con, 12 Dex\tab 
\par \pard\li175 \i COMBAT Spell, will cause 4 Monsters in 3 Groups to be Rotted.\tab 
\par \plain\fs20 When invoked, this spell causes the target to become infected with such an advanced case of Leprosy, that quite often, the victim falls apart and dies horribly.
\par 
\par \b Acidic Spray
\par \plain\fs20 Base Level: 6\tab Guilds: Sor
\par Required Stats: 10 Str, 10 Int, 12 Wis, 10 Con, 15 Dex\tab 
\par \i COMBAT Spell, will cause 6 Monsters in 3 Groups to be dissolved.\tab 
\par \plain\fs20 Causes an acidic wall to fly at ones attackers corroding them upon contact.
\par \pard\li175 
\par \b Flesh to Stone
\par \plain\fs20 Base Level: 8\tab Guilds: Sor
\par Required Stats: 15 Str, 16 Int, 18 Wis, 16 Con, 14 Dex\tab 
\par \i COMBAT Spell, will cause 1 Monster in 1 Group to be Stoned.\tab 
\par \plain\fs20 A  chilling, deadly spell derived from creatures capable of turning flesh to stone, the caster simply needs to touch its target to turn them into a bird perch for eternity.
\par 
\par \b Paralyzing Death
\par \plain\fs20 Base Level: 10\tab Guilds: Sor
\par Required Stats: 18 Str, 20 Int, 18 Wis, 16 Con, 14 Dex\tab 
\par \i COMBAT Spell, will cause 8 Monsters in 4 Groups to be Killed.\tab 
\par \pard\li175 \plain\fs20 This spell has the ability of the caster to nullify the target\'92s nerves, stopping them in their tracks and ceasing all life functions.
\par \fs24 
\par \pard \i\fs20\cf2 Move to the next section to read about Kill Spells.
\par Move to the previous section to read about Damage Spells.
\par \page
{\up +}
{\up $}
{\up #}
\pard\keepn \plain\fs24 
\par \b\fs28 \{ewl FH_BMP.DLL,FH_BMP,goblin.bmp\}Encounters\line
\line
\plain\i\fs22\cf3 \'93Fear is of  the unknown, and the unknown is all that exists below!\'94\line
\tab - \b \'93Charnal\'94, Apprentice to the Master Seeker\plain\fs24 
\par 
\par \pard 
\par \fs20 Exploring the dungeon would be completely boring unless there were monsters trying to terminate your existence.  An encounter can either be peaceful (represented by a \'91peace\'92 sign) or hostile (represented by a skull and crossbones).  If the encounter is peaceful, the monsters may decide to attack you eventually, so don\'92t plan on sticking around the room for too long (a high Charisma will delay them from eventually attacking you).  The first hostile act you take towards a group of monsters will cause them to become hostile towards you.  This includes attacking monsters, casting a spell at the monsters, or attempting to open a monster's chest.\fs24 
\par \pard\fi175 \fs20 You may walk through any room containing monsters (either peaceful or at war).  If you are peaceful, they will leave you alone as you walk through - this is often useful if your character is beat up or if you don\'92t want to bother with small encounters.  However, if you are at war, the monsters will try to terminate you as you maneuver through the room.\fs24 
\par \pard \fs20 
\par \cf1 As you venture further into the dungeon, your character may have problems properly identifying monsters within the first few rounds.  How long it takes for your character to recognize a monster depends on your characters Intelligence, Wisdom and Experience.  After a few rounds, your character should be able to recognize the monster(s) properly.
\par 
\par \b Companions & Monsters offering to Join\plain\fs24 
\par \pard\li175 \fs20 Sometimes one or more monsters may offer to join you and become your companions.  When they do offer to join, you can press \'91j\'92 to allow them to follow you.
\par 
\par Once a companion, a monster will fight for you in combat and will act as an alternative target for the monsters you are fighting.  Your Charisma will determine how likely a monster is to join you and once joined, how long it is likely to stay around.  You may heal and raise a companion just like it was another character.  If you don\'92t keep a companion at full hits there\'92s a better chance that they will leave you.
\par \pard\li175 
\par Whenever a companion dies, you will automatically carry them - if they can be carried (ever tried to carry a giant or dragon?).  If you pick up another character, you will drop any companion you might be carrying.  If a companion dies and you are already carrying one, the companion with the most hits will be carried.  A character will never drop a character to carry a dead companion.
\par 
\par For more information on Companions, see the \uldb Companions\plain\fs20  section later in this Helplesson\fs24 
\par \pard \fs20 
\par \b\cf4 Additional Topics:
\par \uldb \plain\uldb\fs20 Monsters\plain\fs20 
\par \uldb Attacks\plain\fs20 
\par \uldb Combat\plain\fs20 
\par \uldb Treasure\plain\fs20 
\par 
\par \i\cf2 Move to the next section to read about Encounters and Monsters.
\par Move to the previous section to read about the AutoMap.
\par \page
{\up +}
{\up $}
{\up #}
\pard\keepn \plain\fs24 
\par \b\fs28 \{ewl FH_BMP.DLL,FH_BMP,warrior.bmp\}Encounters: Combat\line
\line
\plain\i\fs22\cf3 \'93He who flees and runs away, lives to fight another day!\'94\line
\tab - \b \'93Kodan\'94, Master of the Paladin\'92s Guild\plain\fs24 
\par 
\par \pard 
\par \fs20 Default combat takes place every 2 seconds.  And to make things more interesting, It also takes place in real time - whether you\'92re ready or not. Every round, you have the option of selecting what you wish to do.  You can fight, cast a spell, open a treasure container (if any), or just run.  The symbol in front of the monster group tells you which group you are currently fighting and what your selection was for that round.  To change the current monster group, hit either a number key for the new group (I.E. 1-4) or click on the monster.  You can only fight one monster group at a time.
\par \pard 
\par \b\cf1 Listed below are the cursors and their description:\plain\fs24 
\par \trowd\trgaph105\trleft264 \cellx1255\cellx4405\cellx8745\pard\intbl \i\fs20\cf1 Symbol\cell\pard \pard\intbl Selection\cell\pard \pard\intbl Associated Key\plain\fs24 \cell\intbl\row
\trowd\trgaph105\trleft264 \cellx1255\cellx4405\cellx8745\pard\intbl \fs20\cf1 + \cell\pard \pard\intbl Fight Chosen\cell\pard \pard\intbl f\plain\fs24 \cell\intbl\row
\trowd\trgaph105\trleft264 \cellx1255\cellx4405\cellx8745\pard\intbl \fs20\cf1 [ \cell\pard \pard\intbl Defend Chosen\cell\pard \pard\intbl d\plain\fs24 \cell\intbl\row
\trowd\trgaph105\trleft264 \cellx1255\cellx4405\cellx8745\pard\intbl \fs20\cf1 > \cell\pard \pard\intbl Cast Spell Chosen\cell\pard \pard\intbl c\plain\fs24 \cell\intbl\row
\trowd\trgaph105\trleft264 \cellx1255\cellx4405\cellx8745\pard\intbl \fs20\cf1 \'95 \cell\pard \pard\intbl Nothing Chosen (or Open Chest)\cell\pard \pard\intbl Nothing, <space>, or \'91o\'92\plain\fs24 \cell\intbl\row
\pard \fs20\cf1 
\par \plain\fs20 If auto-fight isn't turned on (default) in the Party Setup (i.e. begin fighting as soon as non-peaced monsters are encountered), the player can 'turn on' fighting by pressing 'f'.  Keep in mind that if the monsters are at war with you, they don\'92t care what you do - they\'92ll attack you every round.  Sometimes a party of characters may want to stop fighting to allow other party members to kill the monsters and gain experience - one can turn off fighting (or defending) by pressing the space bar.
\par \pard 
\par Defend is an option usually only used when in a Party, however, if a player is experienced enough, they can use Defend when running through a room right before a monster strikes.  Defend will increase a characters Defense (while selected) by 50% during combat.  For more information on commands during combat, see the \uldb Commands\plain\fs20  section of this Helplesson.
\par 
\par It is in combat that your character gains the most experience.  The tougher the monster, the more experience your character will gain.
\par \pard 
\par Sometimes, your character may become "pinned\'94.  This means that your character cannot learn any more (gain experience) until they reach the next level in their current guild.  It also means that your character has enough experience to make level and is 1 experience point away from making the next level.  This quite often happens when a character is looking for a quested monster.  The only way to become "un-pinned\'94 is to make a level.
\par 
\par \i\cf2 Move to the next section to read about Encounters and Treasure.
\par \pard Move to the previous section to read about Encounters and Monster Attacks.
\par \page
{\up +}
{\up $}
{\up #}
\pard\keepn \plain\b\fs28 Encounters: Monster Attacks\plain\fs24 
\par \pard 
\par \fs20 Besides using their claws, swords, or whatever weapons they have, many monsters have forms of attack that the player must be aware of.  Below is a list of known attacks, but beware that there are rumors of other forms of attacks existing that have not yet been documented!
\par \fs24 
\par \pard\li175 \b\fs20\cf1 Poison
\par \plain\fs20 Will cause the player to lose hit points every few seconds.  Poison can wear off (a high constitution helps this) but does not wear off very quickly.
\par 
\par \b\cf1 Disease
\par \plain\fs20 Will cause the player to lose less hit points every few second than poison, but takes longer to wear off.
\par 
\par \b\cf1 Stone
\par \plain\fs20 Like Medusa in Greek mythology, some monsters can turn characters to stone.  Getting unstoned either requires a special spell or a trip to the morgue.  One point of Constitution will always be removed from the character being unstoned.  Getting stoned is \i\b not\plain\fs20  the same as \i Rocking\plain\fs20  a character (which requires some sort of teleport/movement spell).
\par \pard\li175 
\par \b\cf1 Age
\par \plain\fs20 Will age the character up to five years.
\par 
\par \b\cf1 Paralysis
\par \plain\fs20 Paralysis is very dangerous.  The player cannot fight or leave the room.  Additional defensive bonuses due to the players ability to move, parry, etc. are lost so the monster has a better chance of hitting you.  Paralysis will wear off after some time (a high constitution helps it to wear off more quickly) but quite often only after your character is dead.
\par 
\par \b\cf1 Electrocute
\par \plain\fs20 Some monsters have the ability to Electrocute a character when they make physical contact.  This form of attack can be very dangerous and is usually delivered by Water creatures.
\par \pard\li175 \fs24 
\par \b\fs20\cf1 Drain
\par \plain\fs20 This attack will attempt to reduce one or more of a characters stats, or drain hit points!
\par 
\par \b\cf1 Breath
\par \plain\fs20 Being fire, cold, electrical, or gaseous, this will cause extra damage to your character in addition to the monsters attack.  Monsters will use their breath attack more often if they feel threatened.
\par 
\par \b\cf1 Acid
\par \plain\fs20 Some monsters have the ability to spit acid.  This form of attack is rare and requires good aim, but when successful, it can be very deadly.
\par \pard\li175 
\par \b\cf1 Spells
\par \plain\fs20 Can be very dangerous, especially if the monster is of a high level.  Since monsters have no guild spell restrictions, certain monsters can cast a wide variety of spells.  
\par Beware that high level spell casters can even throw spells of the likes that even the guilds do not know!
\par 
\par \b\cf1 Critical Hit
\par \plain\fs20 Will do extra damage to your character - quite often enough to kill you.
\par 
\par \b\cf1 Backstab
\par \plain\fs20 Many thieving monsters have the ability to hide in the shadows and backstab your character for extra damage.
\par \pard\li175 
\par \b\cf1 Destroy Item
\par \plain\fs20 Some monsters can destroy items you are carrying or wearing.  The chance of the item being destroyed is based on the power of the item and the power of the monster.  If you find a powerful item, it should not be able to be destroyed by a weak monster.  Monsters that destroy items that are found on the lower levels are greatly feared because they can destroy any item!
\par 
\par \b\cf1 Steal Item
\par \plain\fs20 Thieving monsters are good at this.  They can only steal items that you are carrying, not items you are wearing.  If they get a clear shot at stealing an item, they will pick the easiest one to grab at that time.  If a monster grabs an item and feels it\'92s worthless, it\'92ll bash it against the wall, destroying it, and continue to fight with you, hoping to steal another item.  If the monster feels that the item is valuable, it will run away.
\par \pard\li175 
\par \b\cf1 Steal Gold
\par \plain\fs20 Thieving monsters aren\'92t always brave, so if they steal gold from a character, there\'92s a good chance that they will run away.
\par \fs24 
\par \pard \fs20 For both stealing attacks above, the chance is based on the monster\'92s dexterity, thieving ability, and your dexterity and thieving ability.  So, a thief has less chance of being robbed than a non-thieving character.  Gold or other Items held in the bank are safe, but unavailable while in the Dungeon.
\par 
\par \i\cf2 Move to the next section to read about Encounters and Combat.
\par Move to the previous section to read about Encounters and Monsters.
\par \page
{\up +}
{\up $}
{\up #}
\pard\keepn \plain\b\fs28 Encounters: Monsters\plain\fs24 
\par \pard 
\par \fs20 Rumor has it that the dungeon is more than ten levels deep and contains hundreds of different types of inhabitants.  Since few have ventured beyond the first level, little is known about the creatures that lurk below.  Some are Humanoid and good in nature, some are more Animal and Neutral in nature.  However, some are Demons, foul and evil.  Basically, if one can imagine it, one can probably find it somewhere in the dungeon.
\par 
\par \b\cf1 Lairs
\par \plain\fs20 Some monsters tend to stay in the same place all the time - these locations are known as \'91Lairs\'92.  If you encounter a monster in its lair, you will usually find more goodies as well.  Beware that many monsters that are found only in lairs can be more dangerous than the ones who wander around.  There are also some creatures that will only be found in their lair and nowhere else in the dungeon - because of this, some of these monsters tend to carry unique items.
\par \pard 
\par \b\cf1 Resistances
\par \plain\fs20 Some creatures are rumored to have natural resistances to certain elements and magics while others are said to require powerful and sometimes magical items to defeat.  Unfortunately, the only way to find this out is usually by trial and error.
\par 
\par Below is a collection of known facts about some of the creatures that roam the upper levels.
\par \fs24 
\par \pard\li175 \fs20 Outcast \b\cf1 Goblins & Kobolds
\par \plain\fs20 These little guys are everywhere on the first level.  Small and quick, they\'92re excellent for target practice and make good snacks for giants.  They\'92re not very dangerous except to inexperienced characters.  They quite often give useful Potions and Tomes as well.
\par 
\par \b\cf1 Clean-up
\par \plain\fs20 The acidic nature of these little creatures keep the dungeon floor nice and shiny.  While the Clean-Up is usually docile, they have a habit of attacking anybody or anything that comes around.  These creatures aren\'92t hard to kill, but they can spit acid, which makes them dangerous.
\par \pard\li175 
\par \b\cf1 Dungeon Bear & Giant Owl
\par \plain\fs20 These creatures are the most common Animals on the first level.  To a beginning character, the Dungeon Bear is deadly, but to an experienced character, both of these creatures are good for gaining experience.
\par 
\par \b\cf1 Giant Spider & Giant Centipede
\par \plain\fs20 The insects of the upper levels aren\'92t too dangerous, but can poison a character if they are able to hit them.
\par 
\par \b\cf1 Zombie
\par \plain\fs20 These undead creatures are mean and hard to kill, since they don\'92t really care about much.  Known for giving items that raise stats, these creatures are also good for gaining experience.
\par \pard\li175 
\par \b\cf1 Footpad & Gredlan Rogue
\par \plain\fs20 The thieves of the upper levels, these Humanoids are very good at stealing items from a character, which also means they quite often have stores of treasure and items.
\par \fs24 
\par \pard \fs20 The above information should give a starting player enough knowledge to know what to run away from and what to stay and fight.
\par 
\par As a player becomes more experienced, running into new monsters isn\'92t as threatening since the player may be able to relate the name of the monster in some fashion to previously encountered monsters.  However, a new monster that has a name like no other is completely unknown, and caution should probably be used when fighting such creatures.
\par 
\par Also, it\'92s good for a player to keep track of what type (i.e. humanoid, undead, demon) a monster is (which can generally be guessed by the assigned monster picture).  The reason for this is so a player knows which "charm\'94 spell (i.e. \'91Control Humanoid\'92) may work on a monster.  Also keep in mind that monsters of like types generally share the same abilities (i.e. insects poison, slimes spit acid, etc.).  Quite often, Mages have to go by Trial and Error for charming monsters and getting companions.  \'91Dominate Undead\'92 just doesn\'92t work on a Dragon.
\par \pard 
\par \i\cf2 Move to the next section to read about Encounters and Monster Attacks.
\par Move to the previous section to read about Encounters.
\par 
\par \page
{\up +}
{\up $}
{\up #}
\pard\keepn \plain\fs24 
\par \b\fs28 \{ewl FH_BMP.DLL,FH_BMP,treasure.bmp\}Encounters: Treasure\line
\plain\i\fs22\cf3 \'93Go down there?!  I would rather burn in hell than enter that dark place!\line
What?  How much gold did you say?  Well, since you put it that way...\'94\b \line
\tab - Anonymous\plain\fs24 
\par 
\par \pard 
\par \fs20 Running around and killing monsters can be great sport, but even the most devoted warrior would quickly lose interest without some type of reward.  Like you, monsters run around and fight each other and collect valuables for themselves.  Almost all monsters in the dungeon will have a little gold and sometimes items as well.
\par \fs24 
\par \b\fs20\cf1 Chests & Boxes\plain\fs24 
\par \pard\li175 \fs20 After an encounter with a group of monsters (if you survive), you will collect all of the gold that you can find.  However, if the monsters do have a type of container, they will store their valuables in it.  That\'92s where the thieving skills come in handy.
\par \fs24 
\par \fs20 There are two types of containers.  Chests and Boxes.  You\'92ll learn the difference between the two as you find them.  Chests contain the best treasure while Boxes contain your average find.  Keep in mind that quite often the better the container, the deadlier the trap.\fs24 
\par \pard\li175 
\par \pard \b\fs20\cf1 Examining Traps\plain\fs24 
\par \pard\li175 \fs20 When you are in a room with a container, you will find that the lower right hand corner of the Main Dungeon Window displays some information.  The first bit of information (e.g. Exploding Trap) is the trap (if any) that you think is protecting the container.  Beneath the trap are symbols which represent how sure you are of the trap and how sure you are that you can disarm the trap.
\par 
\par \{bml bm2.bmp\}
\par 
\par The '\'95' characters represent how sure you are that the trap you see is the trap on the container.  Four \'95's represents very sure, while 1 \'95 represents you have no idea.  In front of the '\'95' characters, you will see the symbols that represent your chance of disarming the trap successfully (either '+','*', or '-' characters).  \'91*\'92 would represent 50% chance while the \'91+\'92 and \'91-\'92 signs represent a better/worse chance.  In the above picture of the trap name and disarm information, it is noticed that the character is around 50% sure that it is an Exploding Trap (by the two \'95's), but doesn\'92t really know how to disarm it (the \'91-\'92).  A '+++ \'95\'95\'95\'95' would only be seen through the eyes of a very experienced thief!
\par \pard\li175 
\par Quite often, your character will come along a \cf2 Magically Locked\plain\fs20  chest.  The only way to open one of these chests is with the "charm of opening" spell, which various guilds (e.g. Thief\'92s guild) have access to.
\par 
\par Sometimes, a character will encounter monsters that are so much quicker than themselves that they don\'92t have time to look very closely at the container to identify whatever trap it may have until after combat.
\par 
\par To open a chest during peacetime or combat, either press \'91o\'92 or click on the chest.  If the chest is Magically Locked or Unidentified, nothing will happen.
\par \pard\li175 \fs24 
\par \pard \b\fs20\cf1 Knowing the Traps\plain\fs24 
\par \pard\li175 \fs20 When triggered, some traps will affect all characters in the party while others will only affect the opener.  Below is a list of the known traps that can be found on chests and their affects.
\par 
\par \b Disease Spores\plain\fs24 
\par \fs20 This trap releases gaseous spores into the air that will Disease the opener and any other party members.
\par 
\par \b Poison Gas\plain\fs24 
\par \fs20 A burst of poisonous gas that shoots out and poisons all of the characters in the vicinity of the chest.
\par 
\par \b Exploding Box
\par \pard\li175 \plain\fs20 Explodes upon contact, inflicting damage on all Characters in the group.
\par 
\par \b Fire Trap
\par \plain\fs20 A huge ball of fire that explodes and envelops the opener and any other characters in the area for a good amount of damage.  Characters who are Fire resistant will take less damage, but will still be affected by the exploding pressure of the flames.
\par 
\par \b Slime
\par \plain\fs20 A disgusting goo that instantly attaches itself to one of the items belonging to the opener and eats it away.  
\par 
\par \pard\li175 \b Fate
\par \plain\fs20 Sometimes good, sometimes bad.  Never predictable.
\par 
\par \b Teleporter
\par \plain\fs20 These traps will teleport the opener to a random location on the same level.  Once a teleporter trap is triggered, the chest then becomes untrapped.
\par 
\par \b Fear
\par \plain\fs20 Will scare away all companions of the opener.
\par 
\par \b Withering
\par \plain\fs20 Will age the opener four weeks.\fs24 
\par \pard 
\par \pard\li175 \b\fs20 Blackout\plain\fs24 
\par \fs20 A pulse of Anti-Magic that will remove all resistances and modifiers (i.e. Levitation) from the opener unless the resistances or abilities come from an equipped item or natural resistances.\fs24 
\par \pard \fs20 
\par On all of the above traps, the intensity of the damage done is based on the level of the monster that set the trap.  The higher level the monster, the more deadly/effective the trap is.
\par 
\par Once a container is opened, all of the surviving party members (or single character) will divvy up the loot, sharing it evenly.  Most of the time, items will only be found in chests, even though there is the remote possibility of finding an item outside of a chest.
\par 
\par \cf1 Chests that are identified and not magically locked can also be opened during combat as they are during non-combat, except that it usually takes a number of rounds and makes your character much easier to hit.
\par \pard 
\par \i\cf2 Move to the next section to read about Companions.
\par Move to the previous section to read about Encounters and Combat.\plain\fs20  
\par \page
{\up +}
{\up $}
{\up #}
\pard\keepn \b\fs28 Fire Spells\plain\fs24 
\par \pard 
\par \fs20 Fire was the first of the elements sought to be controlled by the Sorcerers guild.  Spells of this class inflict damage with heat, which can range from a burning candle to a fiery inferno.  The effectiveness of these spells depends on the experience of the caster and the Fire Resistance of the victim.
\par \fs24 
\par \pard\li175 \b\fs20 Firebolt\tab 
\par \plain\fs20 Base Level: 2\tab Guilds: Sor
\par Required Stats: 12 Int, 9 Wis\tab 
\par \i COMBAT Spell, will cause 4 Monsters in 2 Groups to be Fried.\tab 
\par \plain\fs20 This simplest of Fire Spells creates a small fireball and hurls it into a group of monsters, burning anything that gets in its way.
\par \b \tab  
\par Blue Flame\tab 
\par \plain\fs20 Base Level: 4\tab Guilds: Sor
\par Required Stats: 14 Int, 10 Wis\tab 
\par \i COMBAT Spell, will cause 2 Monsters in 1 Group to be Fried.\tab 
\par \plain\fs20 A more advanced spell of flame, when invoked, the caster is able to hurl a blue colored magical flame at a group of monsters, inflicting extensive damage.
\par \pard\li175 
\par \b Flamesheet\tab 
\par \plain\fs20 Base Level: 5\tab Guilds: Sor
\par Required Stats: 15 Int, 14 Wis\tab 
\par \i COMBAT Spell, will cause 6 Monsters in 3 Groups to be Fried.\tab 
\par \plain\fs20 Derived from the Firebolt spell, this spell will summon a wall of fire and hurl towards ones opponents, usually causing the targets to be burnt  to cinders.
\par  \b \tab  
\par Pillar of Fire\tab 
\par \plain\fs20 Base Level: 7\tab Guilds: Sor
\par Required Stats: 18 Int, 18 Wis, 16 Dex\tab 
\par \i COMBAT Spell, will cause 7 Monsters in 4 Groups to be Fried.\tab 
\par \pard\li175 \plain\fs20 When invoked, this spell creates a devastating pillar of fire that forms directly in the middle of one's opponents and arcs outwards, enveloping all who are caught in the flames.
\par 
\par \b Sphere of Flames\tab 
\par \plain\fs20 Base Level: 10\tab Guilds: Sor
\par Required Stats: 20 Int, 21 Wis, 18 Dex\tab 
\par \i COMBAT Spell, will cause 10 Monsters in 4 Groups to be Immolated.\tab 
\par \plain\fs20 This spell creates a gigantic sphere of fire and hurls it into the midst of ones opponents.  Once the sphere contacts living matter, it explodes in an immolating blast of fury.
\par \pard\li175 
\par \b Burning Air\tab 
\par \plain\fs20 Base Level: 11\tab Guilds: Sor
\par Required Stats: 21 Int, 21 Wis, 18 Dex\tab 
\par \i COMBAT Spell, will cause 14 Monsters in 4 Groups to be Immolated.\tab 
\par \plain\fs20 The deadliest Fire spell of all, this hideous magic will cause the air to instantly turn white hot around one\'92s opponents, killing  almost anything that moves.\fs24 
\par \pard \fs20 
\par \i\cf2 Move to the next section to read about Cold Spells.
\par Move to the previous section to read about Spells.
\par \page
{\up +}
{\up $}
{\up #}
\pard\keepn \plain\b\fs28 Frequently Asked Questions\plain\fs24 
\par \pard 
\par \fs20 This section is a collection of frequently asked questions about Mordor.  They are broken up into four sections: \i City\plain\fs20 , \i Dungeon\plain\fs20 , \i Combat\plain\fs20  and \i Other\plain\fs20 .
\par 
\par \b\cf1 City\plain\fs24 
\par \pard\li535\fi-175 \b\fs20 Q:  What does the "0 1 1 0\'94 to the right of an item in the store mean?\plain\fs24 
\par \pard\li625\fi-265 \fs20 A:  This means that there are 0 Unaligned, 1 good, 1 Neutral and 0 Evil items of that particular type in stock.  To get the price, select the item, then the alignment you wish to look at.\fs24 
\par \pard 
\par \pard\li535\fi-175 \b\fs20 Q:  How come some items are so expensive?\plain\fs24 
\par \pard\li625\fi-265 \fs20 A:  Because they have special abilities, or are rare.  You may notice that items such as "Padded Leather Armor\'94 cost nearly 500,000, and it\'92s just Leather Armor.  However, it offers more defense to the wearer than Leather Armor and requires a higher guild level for a character to use.  Some items even raise stats while they are equipped.  However, once your character grows and runs the lower levels, 500,000 will become play money.\fs24 
\par \pard 
\par \pard\li535\fi-175 \b\fs20 Q:  I want to join another guild.  When should I do this?\plain\fs24 
\par \pard\li625\fi-265 \fs20 A:  It is recommended to get a character to Level 30 Nomad before joining another guild.  By this time, your character has built up enough hits and experience to survive the first few levels of the new guild and will be able to stay out longer to collect experience and grow faster.\fs24 
\par \pard \fs20 
\par \b\cf1 Dungeon\plain\fs24 
\par \pard\li535\fi-175 \b\fs20 Q:  How can I tell what other Characters are in the room?  How do I carry them?\plain\fs24 
\par \pard\li625\fi-265 \fs20 A:  Press F2 (see \uldb Commands\plain\fs20 ) to look in the room (or click on the Look tab in the character window) and then \'91p\'92 (or click the Pick Up button on the Dungeon Command Window) and type in the character\'92s name.  If you are carrying a companion, the companion will be dropped to pick up the other character.\fs24 
\par \pard 
\par \pard\li535\fi-175 \b\fs20 Q:  How do I open a "Magically Locked Chest\'94?\plain\fs24 
\par \pard\li625\fi-265 \fs20 A:  You need to be able to cast the "Charm of Opening\'94 spell, or find a magical item that unlocks chest.  Some guilds have this, some do not.\fs24 
\par \pard 
\par \pard\li535\fi-175 \b\fs20 Q:  How come I keep on getting lost in the Dungeon?  How does this happen?\plain\fs24 
\par \pard\li625\fi-265 \fs20 A:  If you hit a Teleporter (or any other type of square that changes the location of your character) and it lands you in an area that nobody has been in before, you\'92ll become lost until you reach an area that somebody has been in before.  Depending on your character\'92s perception ability, sometimes you will be able to locate where you are and what level you\'92re on.  Rotators will also disorient your character, causing you to become lost if you step in an unmapped location after hitting one.\fs24 
\par \pard 
\par \pard\li535\fi-175 \b\fs20 Q:  How come my companions don\'92t stay around, or attack me all the time?\plain\fs24 
\par \pard\li625\fi-265 \fs20 A:  Charming a companion is only half of the work.  Once you get a companion, you must keep the bind level strong enough so that the companion cannot break free.  If you are trying to charm tough monsters with a beginning character, you probably don\'92t have the experience to keep hold of the monster - especially if you don\'92t continue to reinforce the \'91bind level\'92 of the companion.  The way around this is to increase your characters guild level(s) before charming certain monsters, or use a more powerful charm and bind reinforcement spell.  It\'92s also a good idea to keep a companion at full hits, since they lose interest (and binding) when they\'92re wounded.
\par \pard\li625\fi-265 \fs24 
\par \pard\li535\fi-175 \b\fs20 Q:  How come my companions hit my other characters and their companions during combat?\plain\fs24 
\par \pard\li625\fi-265 \fs20 A:  If you have a large party of characters and companions (i.e. 4 characters with 2-4 companions each), there's bound to be some mistakes made by companions as to who the enemy is during the rush of battle (especially if the attacking companions are from the upper levels).  The best way around this is to keep the whole body count (companions & characters) around 6 or less.  For more information, see the \uldb Companions\plain\fs20  section on Combat.\fs24 
\par \pard \fs20 
\par \b\cf1 Combat\plain\fs24 
\par \pard\li535\fi-175 \b\fs20 Q:  I keep on dying.  How can I survive?\plain\fs24 
\par \pard\li625\fi-265 \fs20 A:  Try to keep your Strength and Dexterity around 12 or so (for beginners) and don\'92t wander too far from the city.  The farther away your character gets from the city, the nastier the monsters get.  Also, there is strength and reliability in numbers.  A group of two or three has a much better chance of surviving than a single character on their own - however, it takes longer for a character to advance since experience and gold is shared with all.\fs24 
\par \pard 
\par \pard\li535\fi-175 \b\fs20 Q:  How come I can\'92t see some monsters?\plain\fs24 
\par \pard\li625\fi-265 \fs20 A:  Because they are invisible.  In order to see them, you must be able to cast a spell or find an item that allows you to see them.  It\'92s almost twice as hard to hit a monster that\'92s invisible.  Same goes for a character that\'92s invisible being attacked by monsters that can\'92t see them.\fs24 
\par \pard 
\par \pard\li535\fi-175 \b\fs20 Q:  How come some monster\'92s names change while I\'92m fighting them?\plain\fs24 
\par \pard\li625\fi-265 \fs20 A:  Because your character mis-identified the monster and later realized what it really was.  Mis-identification decreases as a character becomes more intelligent, wise, and powerful.\fs24 
\par \pard 
\par \pard\li535\fi-175 \b\fs20 Q: How do I run away from monsters?\plain\fs24 
\par \pard\li625\fi-265 \fs20 A:  During Combat, you can use the cursor keys to move around just as you can when there are no monsters in a room - you can therefore use this ability to "run away\'94.\fs24 
\par \pard \fs20 
\par \b\cf1 Other\plain\fs24 
\par \pard\li535\fi-175 \b\fs20 Q: My new magic user keeps on dying.  How can I help them out?\plain\fs24 
\par \pard\li625\fi-265 \fs20 A: Unless you have a stash of stats to give to the character or have taken them to level 30 Nomad, it can be hard for a starting magic using character to survive.  A good technique is to put them behind a party of 1 or 2 fighters who are in defend mode.  Put the magic user in back and cast away!  The one or two fighters in the front will take the brunt of the attack (and not kill the monsters since they are in defend mode), allowing the magic user to zap the monsters and gain experience!  This technique works for any type of character.\fs24 
\par \pard\li535\fi-175 \fs20 
\par \b Q: What does it mean when my character is "Pinned\'94?\plain\fs24 
\par \pard\li625\fi-265 \fs20 A:  It means that your character cannot learn anymore (gain experience) until they reach the next level in their current guild.  It also means that your character has enough experience to make level and is 1 experience point away from making the next level.  This quite often happens when a character is looking for a quested monster.  The only way to become "de-pinned\'94 is to make a level.\fs24 
\par \pard\li535\fi-175 \fs20 
\par \b Q:  I\'92m quested for a monster that I can\'92t find and I\'92m pinned!  Help!\plain\fs24 
\par \pard\li625\fi-265 \fs20 A:  In this situation, it\'92s best to either go to the Seer for help (to find the monster), or grab another one of your characters and run them around (build them up) and look for the monster for your other character.  If you find the monster, grab your other character, run to the place where the monster is and kill it.  Rarely will a character be quested for a monster they have never seen.  Be sure to keep track of where you meet what monsters just in case this happens.  If all else fails, one has the option of forfeiting a quest when they try to make a level (and are pinned).\fs24 
\par \pard 
\par \pard\li535\fi-175 \b\fs20 Q:  I have all of these Items, but I don\'92t have the money to identify them.  What should I do?\plain\fs24 
\par \pard\li625\fi-265 \fs20 A:  Sell them!  At first, having money is more important then knowing what they are.  If they\'92re special items, you can just buy them back later when you get more gold.  It\'92s recommended that a Character sells the first few items it finds then uses that money to identify other found items.\fs24 
\par \pard 
\par \pard\li535\fi-175 \b\fs20 Q:  What guilds should I join and work on to create the best character?\plain\fs24 
\par \pard\li625\fi-265 \fs20 A:  That depends on a number of things - do you plan on having the character be a "team player\'94, meaning run in lots of parties with other characters, or be independent?  A party of characters can consist of characters that are specific guild types (i.e. don\'92t have any other guild abilities other than their main guild).  However, if a character wants to survive on their own, they should take the time to build up other abilities in other guilds so that they can be independent.  Of course the best combination is a party of independent characters - however, this takes much more time to create than the previously mentioned choices.\fs24 
\par \pard \fs20 
\par 
\par \i\cf2 Move to the previous section to read about Beginner Hints & Tips.
\par \page
{\up +}
{\up $}
{\up #}
\pard\keepn \plain\b\fs28 Game Options Window\plain\fs24 
\par \pard 
\par \fs20 \{bmc bm3.bmp\}
\par 
\par When one selects the \cf1 Options\plain\fs20  button from the Main Menu, the window to the left will be displayed.
\par \fs24 
\par \pard\li175 \b\fs20\cf1 Game Options
\par \plain\fs20 From here, you can turn on or off the Music and Sound FX.  You can also set the desired volume (provided that your sound card supports adjustable volume), which will be saved.  Also available are the following options:
\par \fs24 
\par \pard\li355 \fs20\cf1 No Party Sound
\par \plain\fs20 This will disable the background sounds made by other characters in a party during combat.
\par 
\par \cf1 No Msg. Ding
\par \plain\fs20 Checking this will disable the message \'91dink\'92 sound that\'92s heard whenever a message appears in the Message List box..
\par 
\par \cf1 No Help Sound
\par \plain\fs20 This will disable the "HELP!" sound that's heard when a party member is near death.
\par 
\par \cf1 No Toolbar
\par \plain\fs20 This will remove the Toolbar that appears when the game is in play.  Useful for making more screen room in 640x480 resolution.
\par \pard\li355 
\par \cf1 No 3-D
\par \plain\fs20 The No 3-D option either turns on or off the 3 Dimensional look to the game\'92s windows.  This may speed up the drawing of the windows on some systems.
\par 
\par \cf1 No StretchBlt
\par \plain\fs20 No StretchBlt is for Video Drivers that cause Mordor to display black or gray squares when the maze and monsters should be shown.  Turning this on will cause the game not to shrink or stretch the game\'92s pictures (this feature has been added to compensate for older video drivers).
\par 
\par \pard\li355 \cf1 No Load Automap
\par \plain\fs20 Selecting this will tell the game not to automatically load the Automap when play beings.
\par 
\par \cf1 No AutoSave
\par \plain\fs20 The option is for systems that don\'92t have a large enough disk cache to keep up with Mordor\'92s general disk access. Switch to this option if your system appears to be slow while walking in the dungeon due to disk hits.  With this selected, the game will only save when you enter the city or a character dies.
\par 
\par \cf1 No Automap Cursor Blink
\par \plain\fs20 This will disable the blinking of the Automap directional cursor.
\par \pard\li355 
\par \cf1 Use Sound Canvas MIDI
\par \plain\fs20 This will cause Mordor to use the MIDI files that were designed specifically for a Sound Canvas-compatible Sound Card (digital sound).  Using this setting with a normal MIDI sound card will not cause any problems - it may even make the music sound better!
\par \fs24 
\par \i\fs20\cf2 It\'92s highly recommended that one try the Sound Canvas MIDI with a normal sound card, because this setting may sound better even without a Sound Canvas-compatible card!\plain\fs24 
\par \i\fs20\cf2 
\par \pard\li355 \b\cf1 Screen Saver...\plain\fs24 
\par \fs20 If you purchased the CD-ROM/Enhanced version of Mordor and installed the Screen Saver, you can run the Screen Saver configuration from the Options window.
\par \fs24 
\par \pard\li355\tx445 \b\fs20 NOTE: \plain\fs20 If you test the screen saver while in Mordor, no Music or Sound will be heard (if you have it selected).  This is because Mordor must receive a system-wide message when the saver is activated before it can release sound to the screen saver, and simply testing does not send this message to the game.  When the Screen Saver is activated by the Windows OS, Mordor will release sound control and minimize for the Saver.
\par \fs24 
\par \pard\li175 \b\fs20\cf1 Font Settings
\par \plain\fs20 This section allows the player to set the Proportional (fix spaced) Font and the Non-Proportional (non-fixed spaced) Font and Font Sizes for the game.  Selecting the Default button will return the fonts to their original settings.
\par 
\par \i Having the game set to the default Font settings will cause forms to be loaded quicker and display faster on slower machines.\plain\fs24 
\par \pard 
\par \pard\li175 \b\fs20\cf1 File Backups\plain\fs24 
\par \fs20 This feature was built for security.  It allows the player to back up the game data files whenever necessary (it's no fun playing Mordor for 500 hours and losing your Data for unknown reasons).  It is up to you as to how often you want to back up the game data, but it's recommended that players do it at least once every week.
\par 
\par \b It is not recommended that players use this feature as a 'Load & Save' option for restoring games because of dead characters, etc. since that is not what it was intended for.\plain\fs24 
\par \pard \fs20 
\par \i\cf2 Move to the next section to read about Character Information.
\par Move to the previous section to read the Game Overview.
\par 
\par \page
{\up +}
{\up $}
{\up #}
\pard\keepn \plain\fs24 
\par \b\fs28 \{bml bm4.bmp\}\line
Game Overview
\par \plain\fs24 
\par \pard 
\par \fs20 Mordor was built to be as realistic as possible.  With this in mind, characters can interact with other characters, pick up and resurrect dead characters, cast spells and exchange items, and even wander around the dungeon with each other.  This is what makes the game really enjoyable. In order to interact with another character, they must be in the same room (or in the city), or in the same party.  Wherever the selected character was last run (before exiting the game) will be the place they will stay until run again.
\par \pard 
\par Another feature that separates Mordor from most CRPG (Computer role-playing Games), is that a player need not "save\'94 the game or character since it operates in real-time and the "saving\'94 is all done automatically without the player even realizing it.  If your character dies, there is no way to go back and "load\'94 the character before they died.  The game just doesn\'92t work that way.  So, when an event happens, it\'92s permanent.  This definitely makes the game more challenging.  It\'92s also nice when a player\'92s machine accidentally "shuts down\'94 - to load the game back up and find your character exactly the way they were before the accidental shutdown.
\par \pard 
\par \b\cf1 Game Interface\plain\fs24 
\par \pard\li175 \fs20 The Windows in Mordor have been created to be similar to each other in use and look.  To add flexibility to the game interface, Character Windows ( e.g. Stats, Items, Companions), can be resized.  When a Character Window is resized, the font within the window will resize accordingly to fit the new size of the window.  To reset a window to it\'92s base size, use the Control Panel.  A player also has the option of setting which fonts they wish to use for the game from the Option section of the Main Menu.
\par \pard\li175 
\par Areas where a user can type in information or Drag and Drop an object ( e.g. Item, Spell), are shaded in a light-tan color.
\par \fs24 
\par \pard \b\fs20\cf1 Pausing the Game\plain\fs24 
\par \pard\li175 \fs20 Anytime the Main Mordor Window is minimized, the game will be paused.  It does not matter if one is in combat or lying poisoned in the dungeon.  Absolutely no game events will take place during the time that the window is minimized.
\par \fs24 
\par \pard \fs20 
\par \i\cf2 Move to the next section to read about the Main Menu.
\par Move to the previous section to read the History of Mordor.
\par \page
{\up +}
{\up $}
{\up #}
\pard\keepn \plain\b\fs28 Guilds: Statistics\plain\fs24 
\par \pard 
\par \b\fs20\cf1 Guild Statistics
\par \plain\fs20 Below is a list of the guilds and information on each one.\fs24 
\par \fs16    \fs24 
\par \trowd\trgaph25\trleft-26 \cellx975\cellx1385\cellx1785\cellx2195\cellx2715\cellx3235\cellx3755\cellx4275\cellx4785\cellx5305\cellx5825\cellx6345\cellx6645\cellx6935\cellx7235\pard\intbl \b\fs20 Guild\plain\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl \pard\intbl\qr \b\fs20 AH\plain\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \b\fs20 ML\plain\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \b\fs20 MH\plain\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \b\fs20 EP\plain\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \b\fs20 QP\plain\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \b\fs20 Str\plain\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \b\fs20 Int\plain\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \b\fs20 Wis\plain\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \b\fs20 Con\plain\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \b\fs20 Cha\plain\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \b\fs20 Dex\plain\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \b\fs20 G\plain\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \b\fs20 N\plain\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \pard\intbl\qc \b\fs20 E\plain\fs24 \cell\intbl\row
\trowd\trgaph25\trleft-26 \cellx975\cellx1385\cellx1785\cellx2195\cellx2715\cellx3235\cellx3755\cellx4275\cellx4785\cellx5305\cellx5825\cellx6345\cellx6645\cellx6935\cellx7235\pard\intbl\qc \pard\intbl \fs20 Nomad\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 5\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 30\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 1\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 8\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 20\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 1\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 1\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 1\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 1\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 1\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 1\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 X\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 X\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 X\fs24 \cell\intbl\row
\trowd\trgaph25\trleft-26 \cellx975\cellx1385\cellx1785\cellx2195\cellx2715\cellx3235\cellx3755\cellx4275\cellx4785\cellx5305\cellx5825\cellx6345\cellx6645\cellx6935\cellx7235\pard\intbl\qc \pard\intbl \fs20 Warrior\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 6\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 28\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 2\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 16\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 20\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 14\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 7\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 5\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 10\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 3\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 8\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 X\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 X\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 X\fs24 \cell\intbl\row
\trowd\trgaph25\trleft-26 \cellx975\cellx1385\cellx1785\cellx2195\cellx2715\cellx3235\cellx3755\cellx4275\cellx4785\cellx5305\cellx5825\cellx6345\cellx6645\cellx6935\cellx7235\pard\intbl\qc \pard\intbl \fs20 Paladin\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 5\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 29\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 2\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 19\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 25\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 14\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 9\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 9\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 10\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 16\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 15\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 X\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \fs20  \fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \pard\intbl\qc \fs20  \fs24 \cell\intbl\row
\trowd\trgaph25\trleft-26 \cellx975\cellx1385\cellx1785\cellx2195\cellx2715\cellx3235\cellx3755\cellx4275\cellx4785\cellx5305\cellx5825\cellx6345\cellx6645\cellx6935\cellx7235\pard\intbl\qc \pard\intbl \fs20 Ninja\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 4\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 25\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 2\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 21\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 35\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 13\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 11\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 7\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 9\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 3\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 15\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 X\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \fs20  \fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 X\fs24 \cell\intbl\row
\trowd\trgaph25\trleft-26 \cellx975\cellx1385\cellx1785\cellx2195\cellx2715\cellx3235\cellx3755\cellx4275\cellx4785\cellx5305\cellx5825\cellx6345\cellx6645\cellx6935\cellx7235\pard\intbl\qc \pard\intbl \fs20 Villain\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 4\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 26\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 2\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 21\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 25\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 15\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 14\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 14\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 11\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 6\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 16\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \fs20  \fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \fs20  \fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 X\fs24 \cell\intbl\row
\trowd\trgaph25\trleft-26 \cellx975\cellx1385\cellx1785\cellx2195\cellx2715\cellx3235\cellx3755\cellx4275\cellx4785\cellx5305\cellx5825\cellx6345\cellx6645\cellx6935\cellx7235\pard\intbl\qc \pard\intbl \fs20 Seeker\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 4\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 27\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 2\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 18\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 20\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 10\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 13\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 13\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 11\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 5\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 13\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 X\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 X\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 X\fs24 \cell\intbl\row
\trowd\trgaph25\trleft-26 \cellx975\cellx1385\cellx1785\cellx2195\cellx2715\cellx3235\cellx3755\cellx4275\cellx4785\cellx5305\cellx5825\cellx6345\cellx6645\cellx6935\cellx7235\pard\intbl\qc \pard\intbl \fs20 Thief\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 3\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 21\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 2\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 15\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 15\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 8\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 12\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 8\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 6\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 5\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 17\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \fs20  \fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 X\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \pard\intbl\qc \fs20  \fs24 \cell\intbl\row
\trowd\trgaph25\trleft-26 \cellx975\cellx1385\cellx1785\cellx2195\cellx2715\cellx3235\cellx3755\cellx4275\cellx4785\cellx5305\cellx5825\cellx6345\cellx6645\cellx6935\cellx7235\pard\intbl\qc \pard\intbl \fs20 Scavenger\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 4\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 24\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 2\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 18\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 20\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 11\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 8\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 8\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 9\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 4\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 14\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 X\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 X\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 X\fs24 \cell\intbl\row
\trowd\trgaph25\trleft-26 \cellx975\cellx1385\cellx1785\cellx2195\cellx2715\cellx3235\cellx3755\cellx4275\cellx4785\cellx5305\cellx5825\cellx6345\cellx6645\cellx6935\cellx7235\pard\intbl\qc \pard\intbl \fs20 Mage\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 3\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 27\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 2\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 27\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 15\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 6\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 11\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 13\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 8\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 10\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 14\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 X\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \fs20  \fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 X\fs24 \cell\intbl\row
\trowd\trgaph25\trleft-26 \cellx975\cellx1385\cellx1785\cellx2195\cellx2715\cellx3235\cellx3755\cellx4275\cellx4785\cellx5305\cellx5825\cellx6345\cellx6645\cellx6935\cellx7235\pard\intbl\qc \pard\intbl \fs20 Sorcerer\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 2\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 29\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 2\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 27\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 10\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 6\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 14\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 13\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 11\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 5\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 8\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 X\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 X\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 X\fs24 \cell\intbl\row
\trowd\trgaph25\trleft-26 \cellx975\cellx1385\cellx1785\cellx2195\cellx2715\cellx3235\cellx3755\cellx4275\cellx4785\cellx5305\cellx5825\cellx6345\cellx6645\cellx6935\cellx7235\pard\intbl\qc \pard\intbl \fs20 Wizard\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 2\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 41\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 2\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 30\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 15\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 8\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 18\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 18\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 13\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 6\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 14\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 X\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 X\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 X\fs24 \cell\intbl\row
\trowd\trgaph25\trleft-26 \cellx975\cellx1385\cellx1785\cellx2195\cellx2715\cellx3235\cellx3755\cellx4275\cellx4785\cellx5305\cellx5825\cellx6345\cellx6645\cellx6935\cellx7235\pard\intbl\qc \pard\intbl \fs20 Healer\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 2\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 28\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 2\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 32\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 15\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 8\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 14\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 14\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 8\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 7\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 14\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \fs20  \fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 X\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \pard\intbl\qc \fs20  \fs24 \cell\intbl\row
\pard 
\par \fs20\cf1 AH:\cf2  \plain\fs20 Average hit points received when making a level before reaching the level of ML.\fs24 
\par \pard\li355\fi-355 \fs20\cf1 ML:\b  \plain\fs20 The Maximum level up to which AH hit points are received.  After reaching ML, MH hit points are received.\fs24 
\par \pard \fs20\cf1 MH:\b  \plain\fs20 Hit points received when making new levels after reaching ML.\fs24 
\par \pard\li355\fi-355 \fs20\cf1 EP:\b  \plain\fs20 Experience Parameter.  The higher the number, the more experience required to make a level.
\par \cf1 QP:\b  \plain\fs20 Quest Parameter.  The percentage chance that a character will be assigned a quest after making a level, requiring the quest to be completed before making the next level.\fs24 
\par \pard \fs20 
\par The Str, Int, etc. are the minimum stats required to enter the guild.  G, N, E, represents the alignments allowed in the guild.
\par 
\par \b Note:\plain\fs20   A character will only receive AH hits when making a level in a guild if that guild is the 'highest' guild the character is a member of (e.g. a level 25 healer will not gain any hits making level 26 if the character is also a level 30 Thief.  The Healer would need to make level 31 (because they were also a level 30 Thief) before they received any hits - and by that point, ML would have been passed, so the character would only receive MH hits).
\par \pard 
\par 
\par \b\cf1 Guild Abilities\plain\fs24 
\par \pard\li175 \fs20 In addition to stats, Guild Abilities determine a character\'92s power and awareness, especially as a character becomes a higher level in the Guild.  When a character is Fighting, Casting a Spells, Mapping, etc. the highest (\cf2 not combined\plain\fs20 ) ability out of all joined guilds is used (i.e. if a character is a Level 30 Nomad and Level 30 Warrior, Fighting Ability will come from the Warrior\'92s guild).\fs24 
\par \pard \fs20 
\par Below is a list of some special abilities and the rate at which the guilds gain these abilities.
\par \fs24 
\par \trowd\trgaph25\trleft-26 \cellx1105\cellx1625\cellx2135\cellx2655\cellx3175\cellx3695\cellx4215\pard\intbl \b\fs20 Guild\cell\pard \pard\intbl \pard\intbl\qc A\cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc B\cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc C\cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc D\cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc E\cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc F\plain\fs24 \cell\intbl\row
\trowd\trgaph25\trleft-26 \cellx1105\cellx1625\cellx2135\cellx2655\cellx3175\cellx3695\cellx4215\pard\intbl\qc \pard\intbl \fs20 Nomad\cell\pard \pard\intbl \pard\intbl\qc 5\cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc  \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc  \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc  \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc 7\cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc 5\fs24 \cell\intbl\row
\trowd\trgaph25\trleft-26 \cellx1105\cellx1625\cellx2135\cellx2655\cellx3175\cellx3695\cellx4215\pard\intbl\qc \pard\intbl \fs20 Warrior\cell\pard \pard\intbl \pard\intbl\qc 2\cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc  \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc 9\cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc 5\cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc 12\cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc 2\fs24 \cell\intbl\row
\trowd\trgaph25\trleft-26 \cellx1105\cellx1625\cellx2135\cellx2655\cellx3175\cellx3695\cellx4215\pard\intbl\qc \pard\intbl \fs20 Paladin\cell\pard \pard\intbl \pard\intbl\qc 2\cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc  \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc 5\cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc 2\cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc 10\cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc 3\fs24 \cell\intbl\row
\trowd\trgaph25\trleft-26 \cellx1105\cellx1625\cellx2135\cellx2655\cellx3175\cellx3695\cellx4215\pard\intbl\qc \pard\intbl \fs20 Ninja\cell\pard \pard\intbl \pard\intbl\qc 7\cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc 2\cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc 5\cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc 8\cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc 10\cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc 6\fs24 \cell\intbl\row
\trowd\trgaph25\trleft-26 \cellx1105\cellx1625\cellx2135\cellx2655\cellx3175\cellx3695\cellx4215\pard\intbl\qc \pard\intbl \fs20 Villain\cell\pard \pard\intbl \pard\intbl\qc 6\cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc 4\cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc 1\cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc 3\cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc 8\cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc 4\fs24 \cell\intbl\row
\trowd\trgaph25\trleft-26 \cellx1105\cellx1625\cellx2135\cellx2655\cellx3175\cellx3695\cellx4215\pard\intbl\qc \pard\intbl \fs20 Seeker\cell\pard \pard\intbl \pard\intbl\qc 3.5\cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc  \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc 3\cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc  \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc 9\cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc 9\fs24 \cell\intbl\row
\trowd\trgaph25\trleft-26 \cellx1105\cellx1625\cellx2135\cellx2655\cellx3175\cellx3695\cellx4215\pard\intbl\qc \pard\intbl \fs20 Thief\cell\pard \pard\intbl \pard\intbl\qc 9\cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc 9\cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc  \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc  \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc 6\cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc 3\fs24 \cell\intbl\row
\trowd\trgaph25\trleft-26 \cellx1105\cellx1625\cellx2135\cellx2655\cellx3175\cellx3695\cellx4215\pard\intbl\qc \pard\intbl \fs20 Scavenger\cell\pard \pard\intbl \pard\intbl\qc 7.5\cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc 5\cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc  \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc 1\cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc 7\cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc 3\fs24 \cell\intbl\row
\trowd\trgaph25\trleft-26 \cellx1105\cellx1625\cellx2135\cellx2655\cellx3175\cellx3695\cellx4215\pard\intbl\qc \pard\intbl \fs20 Mage\cell\pard \pard\intbl \pard\intbl\qc 2\cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc  \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc  \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc  \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc 5\cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc 3\fs24 \cell\intbl\row
\trowd\trgaph25\trleft-26 \cellx1105\cellx1625\cellx2135\cellx2655\cellx3175\cellx3695\cellx4215\pard\intbl\qc \pard\intbl \fs20 Sorcerer\cell\pard \pard\intbl \pard\intbl\qc 2\cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc  \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc  \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc  \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc 5\cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc 2\fs24 \cell\intbl\row
\trowd\trgaph25\trleft-26 \cellx1105\cellx1625\cellx2135\cellx2655\cellx3175\cellx3695\cellx4215\pard\intbl\qc \pard\intbl \fs20 Wizard\cell\pard \pard\intbl \pard\intbl\qc 2\cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc  \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc  \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc  \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc 5\cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc 2\fs24 \cell\intbl\row
\trowd\trgaph25\trleft-26 \cellx1105\cellx1625\cellx2135\cellx2655\cellx3175\cellx3695\cellx4215\pard\intbl\qc \pard\intbl \fs20 Healer\cell\pard \pard\intbl \pard\intbl\qc 2\cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc  \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc  \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc  \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc 5\cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc 2\fs24 \cell\intbl\row
\pard \fs20 
\par The numbers represent the level of the specified "ability\'94.  The higher the number, the better.\fs24 
\par \pard\li175 \fs20 A - Thieving Ability\tab \tab E - Fighting Ability
\par B - Backstabbing Ability\tab F - Perception Ability
\par C - Critical Hit Ability
\par D - Multiple Swings
\par \fs24 
\par \pard \i\fs20\cf1 Multiple Swings represents a character's abilities to swing a weapon additional times in Combat .  A character wielding a 2 swinged weapon with an additional swing learned from a guild will have the chance of swinging 3 times if each swing is successful in killing a foe.
\par \plain\fs24 
\par \i\fs20\cf1 A Character\'92s perception ability is used to notice things in the dungeon (I.E. Anti-Magic squares, rotators, etc.).  In addition to the guild\'92s perception level, a character\'92s Guild Level, Intelligence and Wisdom also affect the level of the ability.\plain\fs24 
\par \pard \fs20 
\par \i\cf2 Move to the next section to read about The Library.
\par Move to the previous section to read The City Guilds.
\par \page
{\up +}
{\up $}
{\up #}
\pard\keepn \plain\b\fs28 Heal Spells\plain\fs24 
\par \pard 
\par \fs20 The first of all spell classes to exist, the Healers guild built the foundation for spells that had the ability to heal, take away disease, poisons and other ailments.  Shared with the Mages guild in good faith, a spell caster with these types of spells is a definite asset to any party of characters.  Spells of this class either Heal or Raise the dead.
\par \fs24 
\par \pard\li175 \b\fs20 Minor Heal\tab 
\par \plain\fs20 Base Level: 2\tab Guilds: Pal (6), Vil (6), Mag(4), Hea
\par Required Stats: 13 Int, 13 Wis\tab 
\par \i NON-COMBAT Spell, will heal hits.\tab 
\par \plain\fs20 This general heal spell is useful for removing small wounds only, so it will not help any other type of  injury..
\par \tab  
\par \b Cure Poison\tab 
\par \plain\fs20 Base Level: 3\tab Guilds: Pal (9), Vil (9), Mag (6), Hea
\par Required Stats: 13 Int, 13 Wis, 13 Cha\tab 
\par \i NON-COMBAT Spell, will remove Poison.
\par \plain\fs20 Very useful to any adventurer, this spell will remove any form of poison that has been inflicted on a victim.
\par \pard\li175  \tab 
\par \b Heal\tab 
\par \plain\fs20 Base Level: 4\tab Guilds: Pal (12), Vil (12), Mag (8), Hea
\par Required Stats: 15 Int, 15 Wis\tab 
\par \i NON-COMBAT Spell, will heal hits.\tab 
\par \plain\fs20 A more powerful heal spell, this magic is used to repair both small and large wounds.  However, just as Minor Heal, other ailments are not affected.
\par 
\par \b Cure Paralysis\tab 
\par \plain\fs20 Base Level: 4\tab Guilds: Pal (12), Vil (12), Mag (8), Hea
\par Required Stats: 6 Str, 11 Int, 11 Wis, 10 Con, 6 Dex\tab 
\par \i COMBAT Spell, will remove Paralysis.
\par \pard\li175 \plain\fs20 This spell will remove any type of paralysis that has been inflicted upon the receiving character. 
\par \tab  
\par \b Cure Disease\tab 
\par \plain\fs20 Base Level: 5\tab Guilds: Pal (15), Mag (10), Hea
\par Required Stats: 15 Int, 15 Wis, 12 Cha\tab 
\par \i NON-COMBAT Spell, will remove Disease.
\par \plain\fs20 Another useful spell, invoking this magic will remove any type of disease that the receiving character may be suffering from.
\par  \tab  
\par \b Raise Dead\tab 
\par \plain\fs20 Base Level: 7\tab Guilds: Hea
\par Required Stats: 13 Str, 16 Int, 16 Wis, 13 Con\tab 
\par \pard\li175 \i NON-COMBAT Spell, will raise the dead.
\par \plain\fs20 This spell recalls the spirit of the receiving characters body and attempts to reunite the two.  Be aware that this spell will only bring the recipient to life, not heal them.
\par  \tab  
\par \b Restoration\tab 
\par \plain\fs20 Base Level: 7\tab Guilds: Hea
\par Required Stats: 17 Int, 17 Wis, 12 Cha\tab 
\par \i NON-COMBAT Spell, will heal hits.
\par \plain\fs20 Restoration is the most advanced Heal spell.  It usually renews a character to full health after only one casting.
\par \pard\li175  \tab  
\par \b Cure\tab 
\par \plain\fs20 Base Level: 8\tab Guilds: Hea
\par Required Stats: 12 Str, 18 Int, 18 Wis, 12 Con\tab 
\par \i NON-COMBAT Spell, will heal hits and remove Poison and Disease.
\par \plain\fs20 This spell will both heal the receiving character\'92s wounds and remove any ailments that the character may be suffering from, such as poisons and disease.
\par  \tab  
\par \b Restore Flesh\tab 
\par \plain\fs20 Base Level: 8\tab Guilds: Hea
\par Required Stats: 18 Int, 18 Wis, 16 Con, 15 Dex\tab 
\par \i NON-COMBAT Spell, will raise a stoned character.
\par \pard\li175 \plain\fs20 Specifically used to return a stoned character to flesh, this spell is the only resurrection spell which will restore those who have suffered such a fate.
\par  \tab  
\par \b Mass Heal\tab 
\par \plain\fs20 Base Level: 8\tab Guilds: Hea
\par Required Stats: 16 Int, 16 Wis\tab 
\par \i NON-COMBAT Spell, will heal hits for every member of party.\tab 
\par \plain\fs20 An advanced heal spell that heals the entire party.
\par  \tab  
\par \b Resurrect\tab 
\par \plain\fs20 Base Level: 12\tab Guilds: Hea
\par Required Stats: 21 Int, 21 Wis, 14 Con, 18 Dex\tab 
\par \i NON-COMBAT Spell, will raise the dead and restore recipient to full health.
\par \pard\li175 \plain\fs20 A more powerful version of Raise Dead, this magic also brings the receiving character back to full health.\fs24 
\par \pard \fs20 
\par \i\cf2 Move to the next section to read about Movement Spells.
\par Move to the previous section to read about Bind Spells.
\par \page
{\up +}
{\up $}
{\up #}
\pard\keepn \plain\fs24 
\par \b\fs28 Hints & Tips\line
\plain\i\fs22\cf3 \'93You are now an explorer and soon will be a keeper of knowledge.\line
Use this time to educate yourself,  and then educate others as they arrive. Prepare to be a teacher.\'94\line
\tab - \b \'93Crashland\'94, Master of the Guilds\plain\fs24 
\par 
\par \pard 
\par \fs20 Mordor is a \i very\plain\fs20  large game and things can quite often seem to be just a little overwhelming for beginners.  Here is compilation of helpful hints and tips that may save a player the time and frustration of dying too many times.
\par 
\par \cf1 Creating a Character\plain\fs24 
\par \pard\li175 \fs20 Be sure to read the \uldb Race Statistics\plain\fs20  and \uldb Guild Statistics\plain\fs20  before creating a character.  That way, you know what you\'92re dealing with.  For a first character, it\'92s recommended that you make them strong and fast - not too stupid - and as ugly as possible.  Taking points from your Charisma and putting them into your others stats is recommended - unless you plan on being a Paladin or Mage.  It\'92s highly recommended that one keep their Int and Wis at least 10 so Tomes can be used if found (items that raise stats).  Remember - your first character is there to check things out, find items and build a foundation for the other characters to come.\fs24 
\par \pard \fs20 
\par \cf1 Starting Out\plain\fs24 
\par \pard\li175 \fs20 As mentioned above, be sure to go over the \uldb Race Statistics\plain\fs20  and \uldb Guild Statistics\plain\fs20  before choosing which guild(s) you would like to join.  It is recommended that a character remains with the Nomad\'92s guild until level 30 is reached.  This is because Nomad\'92s learn quickly and gain more hits per level that most guilds.  Besides that, they can use items earlier than most of the other guilds and are pretty good at collecting treasure.  Once level 30 is reached, you should have found many useful items that your character can use when acting under the chosen guild(s), and your character should then change to the next guild of choice.  It will now be easier for your character to survive because the A/D and maximum hits you built within the Nomad\'92s guild will transfer with you.  You may also have noticed that some guilds require stats that are just too high for a beginning character to have.  The way to get into these guilds is to find items that increase your character\'92s stats permanently and use them (i.e. Tomes and Potions vs. apparel).  You can quite often find enough of these items while you are attempting to reach level 30 in the Nomad\'92s guild.
\par \pard\li175 \fs24 
\par \pard \fs20\cf1 Multiple Guilds\plain\fs24 
\par \pard\li175 \fs20 It\'92s good to have a character that is balanced (i.e. Join a guild with good Fighting Ability and one with good Spell Casting abilities).  Be sure to keep the levels in these guilds balances (i.e. having a level 100 Warrior and level 10 Sorcerer doesn\'92t give the Warrior much in the way of spells).  However, be sure not to join too many guilds, since only one can be worked on at a time!
\par \fs24 
\par \pard \fs20\cf1 Auto Mapping\plain\fs24 
\par \pard\li175 \fs20 This can be a lifesaver.  Always keep track of where you are.  If you get lost (I.E. Teleporter, etc.), the AutoMapper will find you if you step back into known territory, or if your character figures out where they are (by using their perception skill).  
\par 
\par Also remember that the dungeons can sometimes be quite tricky.  Keep in mind that certain types of monsters will only appear in certain places and that some teleporters will always take you to the same location.  This can make traveling through the levels much easier and quicker.  When exploring new areas, it is highly recommended that a character is levitating - it\'92s no fun stumbling across a chute that drops you down three levels.  Also, if a character\'92s guild has a high Perception ability, they can quite often identify what they are standing on, see secret doors, or realize if they hit a teleporter. 
\par \pard\li175 \fs24 
\par \pard \fs20\cf1 Companions\plain\fs24 
\par \pard\li175 \fs20 Always try to have companions, but make sure you don\'92t get monsters that you can\'92t handle.  It is fairly easy for a Mage, but for all other guilds, items must be used (i.e. scrolls that charm).  Keep in mind that a group of monsters you are fighting will attack the closest target - hopefully one of your companions.  Spell casting and breathing (i.e. Mages and Dragons) companions are some of the most effective, since their abilities can affect the whole group of monsters you encounter.  Always keep a watch on a companions Bind Level, for they can turn on and attack your character and the party!  Also keep in mind that companions can mistake other party members (and their companions) for the enemy in the heat of battle if there's too many bodies in the party (total characters & companions).  It's only recommended that one keep 2-4 companions for each character only if the party is 2 characters or less.  It's no fun getting hit by another characters companion that can stone!
\par \pard\li175 \fs24 
\par \pard \fs20\cf1 Wandering Around\plain\fs24 
\par \pard\li175 \fs20 When you first start out, stay as close to the city as possible.  The further away you go, the nastier the monsters get and the longer it takes to get to the safety of the city.
\par \fs24 
\par \pard \fs20\cf1 Combat\plain\fs24 
\par \pard\li175 \fs20\cf2 As a rule of thumb, always watch your hits\plain\fs20 .  Some monsters will have the ability to Poison, Disease, Breathe, and even spit Acid on you.  Keep these monsters in mind.  However, one of the deadliest attacks is Stoning.  Every time a monster with this ability hits you, there\'92s a chance you will be turned to stone.  If this happens, you will die, and 1 point of constitution will always be removed when you are raised.  It\'92s usually best to either run away or blast them with a spell before they can get to you.  Also try to recognize the most powerful monsters in a party of monsters.  Take them out first then move on to the easier ones.
\par \pard\li175 \fs24 
\par \pard \fs20\cf1 Running Away\plain\fs24 
\par \pard\li175 \fs20 When you first start out, you\'92ll probably end up doing more running that fighting.  Since you start with only 15 hit points, a pair of Kobolds can finish you off in two rounds.  So, if you ever get hit, remember that they can hit you for the same amount or harder in the next round, or even as you try to leave the room.  It\'92s best to fight, run away to the castle, heal, then go back down and get revenge.  \i\cf1 Remember - he who flees and runs away lives to fight another day!
\par \pard\li175 \plain\fs24 
\par \pard \fs20\cf1 Gold\plain\fs24 
\par \pard\li175 \fs20 In the beginning, the amounts of gold a character deals with may seem inconsistent.  When you first start out, you'll have 1,500 gold to use as you see fit.  That\'92s enough to buy the starter items that you will need.  However, what happens when you find your first tome that costs 500,000 to identify?  The best way to build up your gold base is to sell the first items you find (that are worth anything) instead of waiting to find enough gold to identify them.  Once you get the base started, your character shouldn\'92t have any major problems that can\'92t be solved by finding a few other expensive items to sell.\fs24 
\par \pard\li175 
\par \pard \fs20\cf1 Dying\plain\fs24 
\par \pard\li175 \fs20 Isn\'92t much fun.  Don\'92t let this get you down - your character can always be picked up by another and resurrected.  After which you may be able to go back and get even with the same buggers that killed you.  Revenge can be sweet!
\par \fs24 
\par \pard \fs20\cf1 Spells\plain\fs24 
\par \pard\li175 \fs20 Magic is one of the most powerful things in the game.  It can be used to heal and destroy.  Everybody should become a member of at least one Magic Users guild.  Keep in mind that beginning Magic Users aren\'92t too powerful and have trouble their first few levels casting spells successfully on monsters.  However, after a few levels are made, the power begins to build.
\par \fs24 
\par \pard \fs20\cf1 Treasure and Chests\plain\fs24 
\par \pard\li175 \fs20 After killing a group of monsters, you\'92ll hopefully find some type of container to poke around in.  Chests are the best because they usually hold more powerful items and more gold, while boxes aren\'92t much better than just gold.  Beware of the traps that can be triggered when opening a chest.  As you go deeper, Teleporters and Slime traps become more common, making things more interesting.  It\'92s usually a good idea to have a Thief around when you feel like gathering loot.
\par \pard\li175 \fs24 
\par \pard \fs20\cf1 Other Characters\plain\fs24 
\par \pard\li175 \fs20 It is recommended that a player keep multiple characters.  What happens if your Thief dies on level 4 and you don\'92t have anybody to get them?  That\'92s what another character is for.  Starting out, I would recommend creating a Giant with maximum Strength and Dexterity to go and pick up dead characters on levels 1 & 2.  Equip them with a Battle Axe, and voila!  You\'92ll be surprised at how well it works.  However, if all else fails and you have the money, there\'92s always the option of hiring "Rescuers\'94 in the Morgue to bring back those characters who you can\'92t get to.
\par \pard\li175 \fs24 
\par \pard \fs20\cf1 Parties\plain\fs24 
\par \pard\li175 \fs20 As mentioned above, it\'92s a good idea to keep multiple characters.  Not only for rescuing other characters, but to join up together and run around with each other.  Remember that parties are optional, but if you do decide to run around with other characters, remember that it\'92s very nice to have a balanced party of a Fighter, Magic User and Thief (but remember that one character alone who is a member of multiple guilds can achieve the same balance).  Also, a group of characters are much safer together than by themselves and can generally run deeper (which allows them to find stranger monsters and neater items).  Keep in mind that while a party can be advantageous in the sense of survival, there is also an experience penalty.  The more characters that are in a party, the less experience a party member will earn when they kill a monster, etc.  Solo characters will gain the most experience the quickest while a party of four will be much safer, but will require much more time to get experience!  Also, as mentioned above in the companions section, be sure not to have too many companions if you have a party of 3 or more characters since companions can mistake other party members for the target!
\par \pard\li175 \fs24 
\par \pard \i\fs20\cf2 Move to the previous section to read about the Control Panel.
\par Move to the next section to read about Frequently Asked Questions.
\par \page
{\up +}
{\up $}
{\up #}
\pard\keepn \plain\fs24 
\par \b\fs28 \{ewl FH_BMP.DLL,FH_BMP,devil.bmp\}The History of Mordor\line
\line
\plain\i\fs22\cf3 \'93\'91And when the darkness fell from the land, all was well\'92 wrote the scholars.  However, since anything that once existed can never cease to exist, this evil must still be out there to be found!\'94\line
\tab - \b \'93Torak\'94, Historian of Mordor
\par \plain\fs24 
\par \pard\fi175 
\par \pard \fs20 \'93`And when the darkness fell from the land, all was well\'92 wrote the scholars. However, since anything that once existed can never cease to exist, this evil must still be out there to be found!\'94\'93Torak\'94, Historian of Mordor
\par 
\par Following the War of The Races, the land of Mordor, shrouded in darkness for hundreds of years, started to thrive and attract settlers and adventurers from far and wide. Trading posts became towns and towns flourished into cities. Today there are hundreds of cities in the land of Mordor. The largest of these cities is Marlith, which was built on the ruins of the ancient city of Rohin, known to historians as \'93Dejenol\'94, which translates to \'93City of the Mines\'94. It was at this location that vast Mines of Dejenol were built - over fifteen hundred years ago by the Dwarven inhabitants of Rohin. These Mines were created for the extraction of precious metals, including Platinum, Adamantite, Mithril, and Gold, as well as necessities like Iron and Copper. 
\par \pard 
\par The facts surrounding the sealing of the Mines and the fall of Rohin are shrouded in mystery, but are believed to be mostly accurate. Legends have it that Rohin was the most powerful and wealthy city in all of ancient Mordor, owing most of its wealth to the minerals and ores taken from the Mines. As the metals were depleted on the upper levels, the miners dug deeper to find new sources. Over a period of centuries, the Mines became so deep that it could take several days to descend and work in the lower levels. As best as can be determined, somewhere on a lower level, a floor gave way. It was from this location that foul creatures began to appear, killing everything in sight. As word reached the city of this catastrophe, search parties were organized using only the best and most skilled miners. The few survivors recovered from the lower levels had glazed and terrified looks and referred to the Mines simply as \'93The Doorway to Hell\'94. From that time on, most of the search parties that entered the Mines were never seen again. Those who did return told stories of creatures and happenings that were so mystical and magical as to be nearly unbelievable. 
\par \pard 
\par In a matter of days, strange events were occurring closer and closer to the entrance of the Mines and the city. It was then, that a decision to close the Mines was made and a massive door was fashioned from a combination of ElvenOak and Adamantite, the only combination believed strong enough to entomb the creatures and the magic of the Mines. Once the Mines were sealed, a lack of work and commerce caused the population of Dejenol to dwindle. It was during this period that an evil wizard accompanied by an band of thieves blew the door from its mounts and stole it for the valuable Adamantite.
\par \pard 
\par The Wizard and his thieves were caught and the remains of the door returned, but the damage had been done. Creatures had escaped from the Mines and built up their numbers, hiding in the forests near the city. The city elders decided to punish the thieves and their master by locking them inside the Mines. This time the door was sealed with magic so strong that no-one would be able to open it without the secret knowledge of the spell used to seal it.
\par 
\par It was after the Mines were once again magically sealed that a great battle began between the inhabitants of Dejenol and the creatures that had escaped. Due to the lack of warriors in Dejenol, a summons was sent out to all of the lands. From this calling, the most skilled warriors and magicians came from all over Mordor and from foreign regions as well.  Many of the creatures from the Mines were not susceptible to normal combat. The battles for Dejenol lasted 2 years, during which the city was destroyed, the entrance to the Mines lost, and most of the inhabitants were killed or driven mad. A few strong souls did survive and lore has it that they guarded the entrance to the Mines until they died, spending their final days recording what they knew, thought they knew, or had heard about the Mines and the creatures within. Those who have entered and returned speak of vast treasures, magical items, and unexplainable occurrences.
\par \pard 
\par Over a thousand years passed before the entrance to the Mines was once again discovered. With this discovery, the elders of Marlith began making preparations to open the Mines and explore its depths. Scholars studied the manuscript remnants found near the Mines\'92 entrance to glean what knowledge they could about the Mines from the ancient scribblings. Equipped with this knowledge, a limited number of explorers were permitted inside the Mines. At first, many who ventured into the Mines were killed instantly, despite being well equipped with the best weapons and magical skill. However, as the explorers\'92 experiences of fighting, magic, and their knowledge of the Mines increased, so did their chances of survival. With exploration came newer knowledge, and with this new knowledge came a healthy respect for the long-lost Dwarves, who created this vast underground world, and for the creatures that still dominated the dark Mines. In the past year, more explorers have ventured into the Mines than ever, eradicating the creatures they\'92ve encountered, and forcing the nastier monsters deeper into the darkness.
\par \pard 
\par It was around this time that a rumor began about a Prince of Devils, who was said to exist in the deepest depths of the mines. At first, many believed the creature to be a myth, used purely to instill fear into would-be explorers. Yet, those with magical powers who have astrally scanned the mines swear that they sense the presence of a dark, evil, and powerful being.
\par 
\par Even though nothing more is known about this Prince of Devils, the guilds have decided to add the destruction of the dark being to their list of goals - and for those who accomplish this task, they will receive the greatest gift of all - Eternal life in the pages of history.
\par \pard 
\par And now, having nearly run out of experienced explorers, a decision was made to train new adventurers to survive in the Mines, hence the city elders formed The Guilds. The Guilds train \'93students\'94 in the skills and arts that are essential to surviving and prospering in the Mines. It is now up to these new Guild members to explore and return with information about the mines, which have taken on a new name to those who dare enter...\fs24 
\par 
\par 
\par \pard\qc\fi175 \i\b\fs20 The Depths of Dejenol.\plain\fs24 
\par \pard \i\fs20 
\par \cf2 Move to the next section to read  the Game Overview.
\par Move to the previous section for the Introduction.
\par \page
{\up +}
{\up $}
{\up #}
\pard\keepn \plain\fs24 
\par \b\fs28 \{ewl FH_BMP.DLL,FH_BMP,dragon.bmp\}Introduction\line
\line
\plain\i\fs20 I would like to extend a special thanks to the authors of \cf2 AVATAR\plain\i\fs20  - a multi-user game on CDC\'92s private supersystem, \cf2 PLATO\plain\i\fs20 .  Their fine creation, which was the spark for this type of game, was the incentive for this program.\plain\fs24 
\par 
\par \pard 
\par \fs20 Mordor is the result of over a year of programming, testing and planning by an individual who wanted to create a new, more involved, Dungeons and Dragons game for the Windows environment.  I hope you enjoy playing it as much as I have enjoyed creating it!
\par 
\par Mordor offers fun not only to the beginner, but to the most advanced and serious player as well.  There is no absolute goal in the game; the players will make their own as they go along - this makes the game as realistic as a player wishes it to be.
\par \pard 
\par Mordor is based on many \'91role-playing\'92 fantasy games where you create your own characters and take their roles in an \'91alternate reality\'92, which in this case is the land of Mordor.
\par 
\par This Helplesson has been written as to give you only the information you will need to start the game.  There are many things that you will not be told about the game.  Part of the fun is fighting a monster you\'92ve never seen before, or finding an item you know nothing about.  The game is far too large to explain and you would soon become tired reading about it.  Go discover it!  Role-playing is an adventure!
\par \pard 
\par I recommend that you read the entire Helplesson thoroughly before playing the game (it\'92s not that long).  As you become accustomed with the game, you will learn which sections contain the bits of information you will need from this Helplesson, so don\'92t worry about all of the information - just suck in as much as you can and go for it!
\par 
\par The game may appear to be complex to the beginner, but don\'92t be concerned - just dig in and enjoy!  It\'92s an adventure!
\par 
\par \cf2 Thank you very much for your interest and I hope you enjoy the game!
\par \pard 
\par \plain\i\b\fs20 David Allen
\par \plain\i\fs20 Mordor CIS Address: 102033,242
\par Internet Address: 102033.242@compuserve.com
\par \plain\fs24 
\par \i\fs20\cf2 Move to the next section to read  the History of Mordor.
\par Move to the previous section for the Table of Contents.
\par \page
{\up +}
{\up $}
{\up #}
\pard\keepn \plain\b\fs28 Items\plain\fs24 
\par \pard 
\par \fs20 The term \'91item\'92 refers to any object that your character wears, carries, or can use.  Your character has 40 item \'91slots\'92 where your items are listed.  You can buy items in the store, find them in the dungeon, or exchange them with other characters.
\par 
\par You can learn what an item does in the store by identifying it.  Items can modify any one or more of the following: attack, defense, stats, hits, age, spell points, resistances, swings, and damage done to monsters.  Some items can cast a spell and will show how many \'91charges\'92 or times you can cast that spell listed next to them.  Certain items weigh you down, causing you to drown in water or quicksand and increasing the damage you take when you fall into a pit.
\par \pard 
\par In general, If you wish to use an item, you must \i Equip\plain\fs20  it - however, some items (i.e. Tomes, Rods, Potions, etc.) do not need to be equipped to be \i Used\plain\fs20 .  A weapon must be equipped before you can fight with it.  To cast a spell from an item, you \i Use\plain\fs20  the item.  You can \i Give\plain\fs20  and \i Leave\plain\fs20  (Drop) items also.  An item may require certain minimum stats and may be restricted to certain guilds.
\par 
\par \b Aligned Items\plain\fs24 
\par \pard\li175 \fs20 Quite often, you will find items that are \'91aligned\'92.  This means that only a character of the given alignment can use the item to its fullest potential.  If a Neutral character Equips an item that is aligned Good, the character will only benefit from half of the items abilities.  If a Good character Equips an item that is aligned Evil (and vise versa), the item will attach itself to the character and become cursed - having adverse affects on the character in the process.  Items that are Unaligned (no alignment) can be used by all characters without any problems.  Using (versus Equipping) an item of a different alignment will have no affect, still taking away one \'91charge\'92.
\par \pard\li175 
\par \fs24 
\par \pard \b\fs20 Class Restriction\plain\fs24 
\par \pard\li175 \fs20 Some items will be 'class restricted'.  This means that a characters current guild must be a high enough level in order for the character to equip or use the item.  Some items cannot be used by some guilds (and will not be listed in the item information).  A 'non-class restricted' item is usable by a character who is a member of any guild (and high enough level in that guild) to use the item.  A good example is a level 30 Nomad and a level 1 Mage.  If the character attempts to equip an Iron Dagger (which is not class restricted), they will be allowed to because the level 30 Nomad part of the character can use the item.  However, if the character attempts to equip an item such as Padded Leather Armor, they will not be able to use it (even though their Nomad level it high enough to use it) because it's a 'class restricted' item, and their Mage level is only 1 (which is too low to use the item).  For more information, see the\b  Item Information\plain\fs20 , section of the \uldb Game Screen\plain\fs20  topic.
\par \pard\li175 \fs24 
\par \pard \fs20 
\par \b Item Classes\plain\fs24 
\par \pard\li175 \fs20 Every item is of a certain "class\'94, for example a Bronze Sword is of the "Sword\'94 sub-class, which is a member of the "Weapon\'94 class.  A Dagger is of the "Dagger\'94 sub-class, which is also a member of the "Weapon\'94 class.  So,  Swords, Daggers, Maces, etc. are all members of the Weapons class.  Same with armor sub-classes (i.e. Leather Armor, Chain Armor, etc.), these are all members of the "Armor\'94 class.  Now, a character can only Equip one item of a given class at once - this means that a character cannot use two types of "Armor\'94 or two items in the "Shield\'94 class at once.  Same goes for \i Rings\plain\fs20 , \i Stones\plain\fs20 , etc.  When an item is identified in the store, depending on the ID level, your character will be told what class the item is a member of.  Items such as Potions, Tomes, Dust, etc. cannot be equipped at all, just used.\fs24 
\par \pard \fs20 
\par 
\par \b Metals\plain\fs24 
\par \pard\li175 \fs20 Most of the metal items in the General Store are made from Bronze.  This metal is readily available, making Bronze Items inexpensive.  Any other type of item (i.e. Weapon) made of a stronger is usually found in the dungeon.  Below is a list and brief description of known metals:\fs24 
\par \pard 
\par \pard\li175 \fs20\cf1 Bronze
\par \plain\fs20 Many Bronze items are only found in the store - the reason is because they\'92re cheap to make.  A Bronze item does well for a starting character, but as one ventures deeper into the dungeon, it just doesn\'92t cut it.
\par 
\par \cf1 Iron
\par \plain\fs20 Items made from Iron are common in the dungeon and are slightly stronger than Bronze and tend to offer more protection or attack capabilities.
\par 
\par \cf1 Steel
\par \plain\fs20 Much harder than iron, weapons made of steel usually offer quicker and stronger strikes.  The armor from this metal is also more reliable.
\par \pard\li175 
\par \cf1 Adamantite
\par \plain\fs20 Stronger than Steel, items forged from Adamantite offer the protection and swiftness of steel and are generally more durable.\fs24 
\par \pard \fs20 
\par Rumor has it that a metal called Mithril, which is twice as strong as Adamantite, can be found deeper in the dungeon.  However, very few have seen items made from this substance and there is currently no proof that such items can be found anymore.  It was also heard that something even stronger than Mithril was found once, but such a rumor quickly died out.
\par 
\par A character can also find many other items that really don\'92t specify the substance they are made from.  One of them is the \i Lethe Dagger\plain\fs20 , a swift wicked blade constructed by magical iron used by Thieves and Mages.  Another is the \i Brown Cloak\plain\fs20 , which is widely found on Level 1 by starting adventurers.  The best thing to do with any item that a character hasn\'92t seen before is take it to the store and completely identify it so that one knows what advantages the item can offer.,
\par \pard 
\par \b Weapons\plain\fs24 
\par \pard\li175 \fs20 There are many weapons which one can find both in the store and in the depths below.  Some of these weapons will offer more than one swing in combat, allowing the wielding character to strike down more than one foe at a time.  Items that give a character multiple swings will only offer extra swings if a foe is stuck down by a preceding swing.  For example, if a 3 swinged item kills on the first swing, but only damages a creature on the second, a third swing will not be available.  The same rules apply for character who have additional swings from guild abilities.\fs24 
\par \pard\li175 
\par \pard \i\fs20\cf2 Move to the next section to read about the City Guilds.
\par Move to the previous section to read about Holding & Confinement.
\par \page
{\up +}
{\up $}
{\up #}
\pard\keepn \plain\b\fs28 Kill Spells\plain\fs24 
\par \pard 
\par \fs20 Created in a parallel study by the Mages and Wizards guilds as they crafted the Mind spells; the Kill spells, which revolved around direct mental and spiritual forms of attack, would either kill the victim outright or have absolutely no affect.  The effectiveness of these spells depends on the experience of the caster and the Magic Resistance of the target.
\par \fs24 
\par \pard\li175 \b\fs20 Nerve Blank\tab 
\par \plain\fs20 Base Level: 1\tab Guilds: Mag, Wiz
\par Required Stats: 11 Int, 7 Wis\tab 
\par \i COMBAT Spell, will cause 2 Monsters in 2 Groups to be Killed.\tab 
\par \plain\fs20 This spell causes all nerves in the designated targets to stop functioning, causing death. Similar to the Paralyzing Death spell, but requires less ability to master.
\par 
\par \b Dazzle\tab 
\par \plain\fs20 Base Level: 3\tab Guilds: Mag, Wiz
\par Required Stats: 13 Int, 8 Wis, 8 Dex\tab 
\par \i COMBAT Spell, will cause 6 Monsters in 4 Groups to be Dazzled.\tab 
\par \pard\li175 \plain\fs20 A more advanced form of Nerve Blank, this spell also affects the spirit as well, attempting to extinguish it.
\par 
\par \b Flickering Doom\tab 
\par \plain\fs20 Base Level: 5\tab Guilds: Mag, Wiz
\par Required Stats: 16 Int, 13 Wis, 12 Dex\tab 
\par \i COMBAT Spell, will cause 7 Monsters in 4 Groups to be Killed.\tab 
\par \plain\fs20 When invoked, this spell paralyzes the victims with a blinding light then sucks their life force from their helpless bodies.
\par 
\par \b Cause Death\tab 
\par \plain\fs20 Base Level: 8\tab Guilds: Mag, Wiz
\par Required Stats: 18 Int, 16 Wis, 14 Con, 12 Dex\tab 
\par \pard\li175 \i COMBAT Spell, will cause 8 Monsters in 4 Groups to be Killed.\tab 
\par \plain\fs20 A simple spell which drives the spirit from the flesh and attempts to shut down the mind and body.
\par 
\par \b Piercing Darkness\tab 
\par \plain\fs20 Base Level: 10\tab Guilds: Mag, Wiz
\par Required Stats: 17 Int, 18 Wis, 10 Cha, 12 Dex\tab 
\par \i COMBAT Spell, will cause 10 Monsters in 4 Groups to be Scared.\tab 
\par \plain\fs20 It is said that this spell invokes a dark form from the spiritual world which penetrates its victims and consumes their life force.
\par \pard\li175 
\par \b Field of Death\tab 
\par \plain\fs20 Base Level: 14\tab Guilds: Mag
\par Required Stats: 22 Int, 22 Wis, 18 Con, 21 Dex\tab 
\par \i COMBAT Spell, will cause 20 Monsters in 4 Groups to be Immolated.\tab 
\par \plain\fs20 A more powerful and flexible form of Cause Death, this spell attacks the spirit with such power that the body is enveloped in flames and turned to ash.\fs24 
\par \pard \fs20 
\par \i\cf2 Move to the next section to read about Charm Spells.
\par Move to the previous section to read about Element Spells.
\par \page
{\up +}
{\up $}
{\up #}
\pard\keepn \plain\b\fs28 Location Spells\plain\fs24 
\par \pard 
\par \fs20 Created by the Mage\'92s guild for failed attempts at movement, spells of this nature are able to locate other specified characters or objects, and aid the caster in  orientation when  lost.
\par \fs24 
\par \pard\li175 \b\fs20 Set Sanctuary\tab 
\par \plain\fs20 Base Level: 1\tab Guilds: Nom, War, Pal, Nin, Vil, See, Thi, Sca, Mag, Sor, Wiz, Hea
\par Required Stats: NONE\tab 
\par \i NON-COMBAT Spell, will set the "Sanctuary\'94 return location.
\par \plain\fs20 Casting this spell will set the caster\'92s "Sanctuary\'94 location.  This means that when the caster  casts Sanctuary,  he or she will then be returned to the exact location where Set Sanctuary was last cast.\fs24 
\par \fs20 
\par \b Depth Perception\tab 
\par \plain\fs20 Base Level: 3\tab Guilds: See, Mag, Wiz
\par \pard\li175 Required Stats: 13 Int, 13 Wis, 13 Con\tab 
\par \i NON-COMBAT Spell, informs the caster of what level they are on.
\par \plain\fs20 Useful in helping  lost explorers \'91find themselves\'92.
\par \tab  
\par \b Soul Search\tab 
\par \plain\fs20 Base Level: 6\tab Guilds: See, Mag, Wiz
\par Required Stats: 15 Int, 14 Wis, 12 Dex\tab 
\par \i NON-COMBAT Spell, will seek out and return the location of another character.
\par \plain\fs20 This spell allows the caster to search for another character.  The caster will receive the offset coordinates, \b relative to the spell caster\plain\fs20 , of where the searched soul is (if they are on the same level).  If the character being searched for is not on the same level as the caster, an up or down value will be returned.
\par \pard\li175  \tab  
\par \b Find Direction\tab 
\par \plain\fs20 Base Level: 6\tab Guilds: See, Mag, Wiz
\par Required Stats: 14 Int, 14 Wis, 14 Con\tab 
\par \i NON-COMBAT Spell, informs the caster of what direction they are facing.
\par \plain\fs20 Also useful in helping  lost explorers \'91find themselves\'92.
\par  
\par \b Retrieve Soul\tab 
\par \plain\fs20 Base Level: 14\tab Guilds: See, Mag
\par Required Stats: 18 Int, 18 Wis, 16 Con, 18 Dex\tab 
\par \i NON-COMBAT Spell, removes a character from Rock.
\par \plain\fs20 For the times that an unlucky character teleports or walks into solid rock, the only way to retrieve them is with this spell.  The caster of the spell must be on the same level that the Rocked character is, or as close as they can get.  If the spell is successful, the retrieved character\'92s body will appear at the feet of the caster ready to be carried or resurrected.
\par \pard\li175 \fs24 
\par \pard \i\fs20\cf2 Move to the next section to read about Protection Spells.
\par Move to the previous section to read about Magical Spells.
\par \page
{\up +}
{\up $}
{\up #}
\pard\keepn \plain\b\fs28 MIDI Mapper & Troubleshooting\plain\fs24 
\par \pard\sb235\sa55 \i\b\fs22 Windows MIDI Mapper, an Overview\plain\fs24 
\par \pard \fs20 
\par Mordor comes with a rich MIDI (Musical Instrument Digital Interface) Musical score.  However, some systems may require the modification of the computers MIDI setup before the music for Mordor will play properly.\fs24 
\par \pard\fi175 \fs20 To understand how the MIDI Mapper works, one must understand how MIDI data is transferred from one place to another.  This information will help in troubleshooting problems such as no sound from your sound card.
\par MIDI data is carried on 16 discreet channels.  MIDI used in computer applications usually uses channels 1-9 and 11-16 for melodic instruments, like flute, piano, etc. Channel 10 is usually reserved for percussion instruments, i.e. drums, cymbals, etc. Windows' MIDI Mapper divides the channels into two setups, Extended and Basic.  
\par \pard\fi175 An Extended Setup uses MIDI channels 2-9 for melodic instruments and channel 10 for percussion.  A Basic Setup uses channels 13-15 for melodic instruments and channel 16 for percussion. Both setups use only the channels mentioned and will not transfer data on any other channels.  The MIDI data in Mordor has been authored for Extended Setups only.  A troubleshooting chart is included here for help in getting Mordor to use your sound card.
\par Before attempting to make changes to your MIDI Mapper, please read and understand the information in your Windows documentation regarding MIDI and the MIDI Mapper.  It is highly recommended that copies of all files in your Windows directories, including SYSTEM.INI and WIN.INI files be made on a blank floppy disc. These files can be copied back to their original directories should changing your MIDI Mapper cause problems.
\par \pard\fi175 If you have any problems with hearing the MIDI music, or it doesn\'92t sound right, please see the following troubleshooting section.
\par \fs24 
\par \pard\sb235\sa55 \i\b\fs22 MIDI/Sound Troubleshooting\plain\fs24 
\par \pard \fs20 
\par \i\b Problem\plain\fs24 
\par \pard\li175 \fs20 No Sound\fs24 
\par \pard \fs20 
\par \i Solutions\plain\fs24 
\par \pard\li535\fi-355 \fs20 1.\tab Make sure your speakers or headphones are plugged in and working.\fs24 
\par \pard\li715\fi-535 \fs20 2.\tab Make sure you have drivers for your sound card installed in Windows. If you have not done this, please refer to your Windows manual and the documentation for your sound card.\fs24 
\par \pard\li535\fi-355 \fs20 3.\tab Your MIDI Mapper is setup for Basic. Edit the MIDI Mapper. See below.\fs24 
\par \pard \fs20 
\par 
\par \i\b Problem\plain\fs24 
\par \pard\li175 \fs20 Beeps when WAVE files should be playing\fs24 
\par \pard \fs20 
\par \i Solutions\plain\fs24 
\par \pard\li535\fi-355 \fs20 1.\tab Set the ShowDevices property in the [general] section of WINDOWS\'5cWAVEMIX.INI to 1.
\par 2.\tab WAVMIX16.DLL is out of date, or was not installed properly\fs24 
\par \pard \fs20 
\par 
\par \i\b Problem\plain\fs24 
\par \pard\li175 \fs20 The instruments don't sound right, i.e. there are no drum sounds.\fs24 
\par \pard \fs20 
\par \i Solution\plain\fs24 
\par \pard\li715\fi-535 \fs20 1.\tab Make sure the sound card driver you are using is a General MIDI driver. If it is not, you will need to contact your sound card vendor or manufacturer for an updated driver. Many drivers are available on Compuserve, America on-line, and local BBS's. Drivers are device specific, which means that a driver for a Sound Blaster Pro will probably not work on any other card.
\par \tab \fs24 
\par \pard\li535\fi-355 \fs20 2.\tab Your MIDI Mapper is setup for Basic. Edit the MIDI Mapper. See below.\fs24 
\par \pard \fs20 
\par 
\par \i\b Problem\plain\fs24 
\par \pard\li175 \fs20 The volume is very low.
\par \fs24 
\par \pard \fs20 Solution\fs24 
\par \pard\li535\fi-355 \fs20 1.\tab Many sound cards include software mixer applications. Find this and open it. If the volume for MIDI is low, turn it up.\fs24 
\par \pard \fs20 
\par 
\par \i\b Problem\plain\fs24 
\par \pard\li175 \fs20 Sound is distorted\fs24 
\par \pard \fs20 
\par \i Solution\plain\fs24 
\par \pard\li715\fi-535\tx85 \fs20 1.\tab You are probably running the speakers or sound card amplifier beyond its capacity.  Try connecting the sound card output to an external amplifier, like a stereo system. Always turn off the stereo when connecting or disconnecting devices from its inputs. After powering the stereo back up, bring up the volume slowly to avoid damaging the stereo speakers and your ears.\fs24 
\par \pard\sb235\sa55\li715\fi-535\tx85 
\par \pard\sb235\sa55 \b Editing the Windows MIDI Mapper\plain\fs24 
\par \pard \fs20 Do not try to edit the MIDI Mapper unless you feel completely comfortable making these changes.  If you are new to Windows, please seek the assistance of someone experienced with Windows. Also, do not make changes until you have backed up the files listed in item 1.
\par \fs24 
\par \pard\li715\fi-715 \fs20 1)\tab Always make a copy of existing files. Include WIN.INI and SYSTEM.INI in the WINDOW directory.  Also include MIDIMAP.CFG and MIDIMAP.DRV in the WINDOWS\'5cSYSTEM directory.
\par 2)\tab Open Control Panel and open MIDI Mapper.\fs24 
\par \pard\li355\fi-355 \fs20 3)\tab In the MIDI Mapper dialog box, "Setups" should be selected. Press "New".
\par 4)\tab Enter Name and Description and press "OK".
\par 5)\tab All "SRC" (Source) channels should be the same as all "DEST"
\par 6)\tab (Destination) channels, i.e. SRC 1-DEST 1, SRC 2-DEST 2, etc.
\par 7)\tab The third column is "Port Name". Press the down arrow to open the menu of installed drivers.\fs24 
\par \pard\li715\fi-715 \fs20 8)\tab Select the General MIDI driver installed on your system. If you have a separate MIDI port, such as the Roland MPU-IPC, and wish to use it to drive an external device, select it.
\par 9)\tab Repeat number 7 for all 16 channels.\fs24 
\par \pard\li355\fi-355 \fs20 10)\tab Press "OK".
\par 11)\tab When asked to save, answer "Yes".
\par 12)\tab The name of your new MIDI Map should appear in the Name box. It is now active. Press ALT and F4 to close MIDI Mapper.\fs24 
\par \pard \fs20 
\par Compuserve subscribers can find additional help with MIDI issues in the MIDI/Music Forum (GO MIDIFORUM). Other on-line services also offer sections for users interested in MIDI to discuss issues. Please consult your service's help section for details.\fs24 
\par \page
{\up +}
{\up $}
{\up #}
\pard\keepn \b\fs28 Magical Spells\plain\fs24 
\par \pard 
\par \fs20 Spells of this nature vary depending on type.  Being purely magical and created by various guilds, spells of this type usually revolve around some effect that is not supported by any of the other classes.
\par \fs24 
\par \pard\li175 \b\fs20 Charm of Opening\tab 
\par \plain\fs20 Base Level: 1\tab Guilds: Nom (12), Nin (9), Thi(3), Sca (6)
\par Required Stats: 12 Str, 13 Int, 13 Wis, 13 Dex\tab 
\par \i NON-COMBAT Spell, will open Magically Locked chests.
\par \plain\fs20 Casting this spell will unlock a magically locked chest.
\par \fs24 
\par \pard \i\fs20\cf2 Move to the next section to read about Location Spells.
\par Move to the previous section to read about Visual Spells.
\par \page
{\up +}
{\up $}
{\up #}
\pard\keepn \plain\b\fs28 Main Menu\plain\fs24 
\par \pard 
\par \fs20 The first thing you see when you start Mordor will be the Main Menu. In order to play the game, you must first Create or Load a character, and then Run the character.
\par 
\par Below is a brief summary of each available option on the Main Menu.
\par \fs24 
\par \pard\li175 \b\fs20\cf1 Create Character
\par \plain\fs20 This option is only available when another character is not loaded.  Clicking this button will bring up the Character Creation window, allowing a new character to be created.  If the new character is saved, it will automatically be loaded when you come back to the Main Menu.  All you then need to do is Run the character.
\par 
\par \b\cf1 Run Character
\par \plain\fs20 When you Load a character, the Create Character button will be replaced with Run Character.  This will start the game with the currently loaded character (specified in the caption of the command button).
\par \pard\li175 
\par \b\cf1 Change Password
\par \plain\fs20 This option allows you to change the password for the currently loaded character.  Passwords are important since they protect your characters from somebody else having access to them.  This feature also allows more than one person to play on a single machine.
\par 
\par \b\cf1 Exchange Items
\par \plain\fs20 This option allows you to exchange gold and items between two characters that are at the same location.  This is extremely useful when a player wants to keep a "bank\'94 character - that is: a character that just sits in the City (or Dungeon) and holds items.  This is also the only way one can exchange items or gold with a dead character.
\par \pard\li175 
\par \b\cf1 Load Character
\par \plain\fs20 Will prompt the user for the character to Load, then load the character (if the proper password is specified).
\par 
\par \b\cf1 Unload Character
\par \plain\fs20 Will unload the currently loaded character, allowing the user to Create or Load another character.
\par 
\par \b\cf1 Character List
\par \plain\fs20 This option will list all available characters on the current Machine.
\par 
\par \i\b Some of the options listed above will remain unavailable (invisible) until a character is loaded.
\par \plain\fs24 
\par \b\fs20\cf1 Options\plain\fs24 
\par \pard\li175 \fs20 This will bring up the Game Options Window, which is described in the next section.
\par \fs24 
\par \b\fs20\cf1 Hall of Records\plain\fs24 
\par \fs20 This will bring up a list of characters that hold the set Records for various abilities in the game.
\par \fs24 
\par \b\fs20\cf1 About\plain\fs24 
\par \fs20 This option displays the current information and credits for Mordor.
\par 
\par \b\cf1 Helplesson
\par \plain\fs20 Executes this Helplesson
\par 
\par \b\cf1 Exit
\par \plain\fs20 Shuts down Mordor and returns to the Program Manager.\fs24 
\par \pard \fs20 
\par \i\cf2 Move to the next section to read about Game Options Window.
\par Move to the previous section to read the Game Overview.
\par 
\par \page
{\up +}
{\up $}
{\up #}
\pard\keepn \plain\b\fs28 Mind Spells\plain\fs24 
\par \pard 
\par \fs20 As the Sorcerers were working on destructive elemental forces, two other guilds, the Mage and Wizards guilds, joined together in the study of the mind, and in the process, came up with many powerful defensive and aggressive spells.  The effectiveness of these spells depends on the experience of the caster and the Mind Resistance of the monster.
\par \fs24 
\par \pard\li175 \b\fs20 Sleep
\par \plain\fs20 Base Level: 1\tab Guilds: Mag, Wiz
\par Required Stats: 12 Int, 11 Wis, 8 Dex\tab 
\par \i COMBAT Spell, will cause 2 Monsters in 2 Groups to be Slept.\tab 
\par \plain\fs20 When cast, this spell attempts to take over the mind and put the designated targets to sleep so that they may be killed without a struggle.
\par 
\par \b Light Spray
\par \plain\fs20 Base Level: 4\tab Guilds: Mag, Wiz
\par Required Stats: 15 Int, 9 Wis, 9 Dex\tab 
\par \i COMBAT Spell, will cause 6 Monsters in 4 Groups to be Dazzled.\tab 
\par \plain\fs20 When invoked, this spell creates a mentally projected and amplified light so bright that many are instantly killed.
\par \pard\li175 
\par \b Summon Shade
\par \plain\fs20 Base Level: 6\tab Guilds: Mag, Wiz
\par Required Stats: 14 Int, 12 Wis, 10 Cha, 8 Dex\tab 
\par \i COMBAT Spell, will cause 7 Monsters in 4 Groups to be Scared.\tab 
\par \plain\fs20 A  ghastly spell that creates a mental demon so terrifying that it scares most creatures to death.
\par 
\par \b Precognitive Death
\par \plain\fs20 Base Level: 12\tab Guilds: Mag, Wiz
\par Required Stats: 18 Int, 15 Wis, 10 Con, 14 Dex\tab 
\par \i COMBAT Spell, will cause 14 Monsters in 4 Groups to be Killed.\tab 
\par \plain\fs20 The most powerful of all Mind spells, this dark form of magic convinces the targets that they have died, causing their bodily functions to stop - effectively killing them from inside.\fs24 
\par \pard \fs20 
\par \i\cf2 Move to the next section to read about Damage Spells.
\par Move to the previous section to read about Electrical Spells.
\par \page
{\up +}
{\up $}
{\up #}
\pard\keepn \plain\b\fs28 Mordor Ordering Information\plain\fs24 
\par \pard 
\par \b\fs20 NOTE: When you purchase the Mordor, you are NOT registering a shareware product.  You are getting the full blown commercial application that includes a manual, playguide, CD ROM (or disk) and a box  The commercial version of Mordor is exactly what you would get at a retail software store.\plain\fs24 
\par \fs20 
\par Whether you\'92re ordering MORDOR for yourself or as a gift, this one of a kind Windows FRP game, designed to be played for hundreds of hours and longer, will put a smile on any avid FRPer\'92s face!
\par \pard 
\par The full version of MORDOR has so many more Monsters, Items and Dungeon Levels than the PUBLIC version that we can\'92t even begin to get into detail.  Find out for yourself!
\par 
\par You can now pre-order the full version of MORDOR at any time for only $39.95 + S&H!  Feel free to use your VISA, MASTERCARD, Check, or Money Order to have this first of its kind Windows FRP game sent directly to your doorstep!
\par 
\par To order, call TDA at (800) 624-2101 between the hours of 9AM and 4PM PST (Monday - Friday) and ask to order MORDOR!  Be sure to specify either 3.5" disks or CD-ROM!
\par \pard 
\par When you order Mordor, please have the following information ready:
\par \tab Name\line
\tab Shipping Address\line
\tab City, State/Province - Zip/Post Code\'7f\line
\tab Country\line
\tab Phone Number\line
\tab Fax Number\line
\tab Credit Card Number\line
\tab Credit Card Expiration Date\line

\par You can also contact the company at the following CIS & Internet address:\line
\tab CIS: 102033,242\line
\tab Internet: 102033.242@compuserve.com\line

\par If you get a chance, visit the official Mordor Internet Home Page for general discussion, information, comments, and upgrades at the following location:
\par \pard 
\par \tab \b http://www.tyrell.net/~hawkenet/mordor.html\plain\fs24 
\par 
\par \fs20 Remember!  If you order via EMail, be sure to include the proper Credit Card information as well as your name/address information!
\par 
\par IMPORTANT: Remember that ordering over the Internet with a Credit Card is not a good idea since your message may be readable by others.  Please consider using the fax machine, telephone, or mail to place your order.   TDA's Fax 206/742-3666
\par 
\par Mail Address:\line
\tab TDA!\line
\tab 720 132nd St SW #202\line
\tab Everett, WA 98204\line
\tab (206) 742-4145\line
\line
FAX your Order information:\line
\tab TDA !\line
\tab (206) 742-3666\line

\par \pard Order the full version of MORDOR now & see just how far you can take adventure!
\par 
\par \b MORDOR is \'a9 Copyright 1994-1995, MakeItSo Software\plain\fs24 
\par \fs20 
\par \page
{\up $}
{\up #}
\pard\keepn \b\fs28 Mordor Screen Saver\plain\fs24 
\par \pard 
\par \fs20 The Mordor 1.1 Commercial CD-ROM Version comes with a unique Mordor Screen Saver that hooks into the game's Library and displays large, high quality graphics for monster entries in the library along with general information.  It also features the Sound FX and Music from Mordor.  Allowing password protection, this Screen Saver is guaranteed to dazzle any Mordor Player as the unique graphics define the dark creatures from the depths below.
\par 
\par Please feel free to use the graphics that come with the Mordor Screen Saver for your own personal use, but understand that they cannot be modified, reproduced, or distributed in any way since they are the legal property of MakeItSo Software.
\par \pard \fs24 
\par \b\fs20 NOTE: \plain\fs20 If you test the screen saver while in Mordor, no Music or Sound will be heard (if you have it selected).  This is because Mordor must receive a system-wide message when the saver is activated before it can release sound to the screen saver, and simply testing does not send this message to the game.  When the Screen Saver is activated by the Windows OS, Mordor will release sound control and minimize for the Saver.
\par \fs24 
\par \b\fs20\cf1 Sound\plain\fs24 
\par \pard\li175 \fs20 The Mordor Screen Saver uses the same volume settings that are used by the game.  If you wish to adjust the volume at which either the Music or Sound FX are played at while the Screen Saver is active, you can do it from the Game Options Window of MORDOR.\fs24 
\par \pard 
\par \page
{\up +}
{\up $}
{\up #}
\pard\keepn \b\fs28 Movement Spells\plain\fs24 
\par \pard 
\par \fs20 In an effort to control one\'92s surroundings, the Wizard\'92s guild focused their study towards the ability of traveling and moving by the use of magic.  Ranging from the ability to walk through walls to teleporting a long distance away, these spells are very handy in moving around in the dungeon.
\par \fs24 
\par \pard\li175 \b\fs20 Detect Rock\tab 
\par \plain\fs20 Base Level: 1\tab Guilds: See, Mag, Wiz
\par Required Stats: 14 Int, 14 Wis, 12 Con\tab 
\par \i NON-COMBAT Spell, will inform caster of Rock.
\par \plain\fs20 This spell allows the caster to detect whether rock exists behind the wall in front of them or not.  Very useful for mapping and finding secret rooms.
\par  \tab  
\par \b Feather Essence\tab 
\par \plain\fs20 Base Level: 3\tab Guilds: See, Mag, Wiz
\par Required Stats: 14 Int, 14 Wis, 14 Con\tab 
\par \i NON-COMBAT Spell, will levitate recipient.
\par \plain\fs20 This will cause the recipient to hover in the air, avoiding pits, chutes, water and other dangerous areas.  There is always the slight chance that levitation over a space  will fail.
\par \pard\li175 
\par \b Ethereal Portal
\par \plain\fs20 Base Level: 5\tab Guilds: See, Mag, Wiz
\par Required Stats: 14 Str, 18 Int, 18 Wis, 18 Dex\tab 
\par \i NON-COMBAT Spell, will move a character or party.
\par \plain\fs20 When cast, the character, and all members of the party, will move through the solid wall in front of the caster and appear on the other side.  If the square behind the wall is rock, all members of the party will die.
\par  \tab  
\par \b Displacement
\par \plain\fs20 Base Level: 8\tab Guilds: See, Wiz
\par Required Stats: 14 Int, 10 Wis, 14 Dex\tab 
\par \pard\li175 \i NON-COMBAT Spell, will teleport a character or party on the same level.
\par \plain\fs20 A useful spell for teleporting around in the dungeon on the current level.  Be warned that if the caster teleports outside the bounds of the dungeon or into rock, the caster  ( and entire party) will die.
\par  \tab  
\par \b Mass Levitate
\par \plain\fs20 Base Level: 8\tab Guilds: See, Wiz
\par Required Stats: 12 Str, 16 Int, 16 Wis, 14 Con, 12 Dex\tab 
\par \i NON-COMBAT Spell, will Levitate entire party.
\par \plain\fs20 This spell accomplishes the same as Feather Essence, except it affects an entire party.
\par \pard\li175  \tab  
\par \b Teleport
\par \plain\fs20 Base Level: 12\tab Guilds: See, Wiz
\par Required Stats: 17 Int, 14 Wis, 11 Con, 17 Dex\tab 
\par COMBAT & \i NON-COMBAT Spell, will either cause 4 Monsters in 4 Groups to be Teleported or will teleport a character and their party with a range of multiple levels.
\par \plain\fs20 One of the Seeker\'92s and Wizard\'92s most useful spells that can move the caster and any party up or down and around the dungeon a maximum of three levels.  This spell can also be used in Combat to transport attacking enemies so far away they they are impaled in solid rock!  When used in combat, the effectiveness of this spell is based on the creatures magical resistance.
\par \pard\li175  \tab  
\par \b Sanctuary\tab 
\par \plain\fs20 Base Level: 12\tab Guilds: See, Wiz
\par Required Stats: 16 Int, 20 Wis, 15 Con\tab 
\par \i NON-COMBAT Spell, returns the caster or party to the Set Sanctuary location.
\par \plain\fs20 When invoked, this spell will instantly transport the caster and any party members to the location that \'91Set Sanctuary\'92 was cast last.  If \'91Set Sanctuary\'92 as not been cast, nothing will happen.  Be warned that throwing this spell takes great energy and ages the caster approximately one year.\fs24 
\par \pard \fs20 
\par \i\cf2 Move to the next section to read about Banish Spells.
\par Move to the previous section to read about Heal Spells.
\par \page
{\up +}
{\up $}
{\up #}
\pard\keepn \plain\b\fs28 Parties\plain\fs24 
\par \pard 
\par \fs20 Sometimes four groups of monsters against one character just doesn\'92t seem fair.  To compensate for this, a player is able to organize a party of up to 4 characters to run around together, fight together, and interact with each other (i.e. cast Heal/Resistant spells on each other).  To create a party, a character must "ask\'94 another character to join them.  This is done by pressing \'91a\'92 then selecting or typing in the name and password of the character that the user wishes to add to the party.  Once a character becomes a member of the party, they can interact with all other characters in the party.
\par \pard \fs24 
\par \fs20\cf1 One can also Ask a character who is dead to join, but the character being asked must have a "raise\'94 spell cast on them already.  Once asked, the player will be prompted to accept the raise or not for the character.  If the raise is accepted, the character will join the party as soon as they are alive.\plain\fs24 
\par \i\fs20 
\par \plain\fs20 One of the major advantages to having a group of characters running around versus a single character is that the player will generally be able to take the group deeper into the dungeon and have a better chance of all characters surviving the trip since they can depend on each other.
\par \pard 
\par Characters that are oppositely aligned cannot be in the same party together (i.e. a Good character can\'92t join a party that has an Evil character in it).
\par 
\par Control is based on the currently "selected\'94 character.  For example, if a player has a party of three characters, the player can select which character they wish to "bring up\'94 or enter commands for by pressing ALT-<character number> (i.e. ALT-1).  Once the character is selected, the interaction with the game is the exact same as if the character was running by themselves.
\par \pard 
\par You may notice that when you switch characters in the dungeon, all of the windows don\'92t automatically update.  The reason for this is because it sometimes takes a few seconds to repaint all of the windows (on slower machines), and when in combat, wasting this about of time in the middle of a fight for a repaint is unacceptable.  Not updating all of the windows allows the user to switch between characters in the party as fast as one can hit the keys or click the mouse.
\par 
\par \pard To update all of the windows to the \'91current character\'92 use the Switch To button described below.
\par 
\par \b\fs24 Creating a Party\plain\fs24 
\par \pard\li175 \fs20 The way you create a party is by 'a'sking other existing characters to join the current character that you are running.  In order for other characters to join you, they must be in the same room, or in the city with you, and alive.  Once a party of characters is formed, the program will automatically remember and reload the party (if requested) when the party leader is loaded again.  A party is only automatically reloaded if the party leader is run from the Main Menu.  Parties are limited to a maximum of 4 characters.  You can remove a party member by asking them to 'L'eave.
\par \pard\li175 
\par For a more detailed list of commands in reference to Parties, see the \uldb Commands\plain\fs20  section of this Helplesson.\fs24 
\par \pard \fs20 
\par \b\fs24 The Party Window
\par \{bml bm5.bmp\}\plain\fs20  When a party is first organized, this window will pop up and remain until the party is disbanded (or killed).  This window is the control center for the party, displaying each characters status, and allowing certain options to be selected.
\par \fs24 
\par \pard\li175 \b\fs20\cf1 Party Order
\par \plain\fs20\cf2 A player can change the order of the party (and swap character positions) by Dragging and Dropping characters names within the Name field of the Party Information Window.
\par \plain\fs24 
\par \b\fs20\cf1 Giving Items & Gold
\par \plain\fs20 You can also give an item or gold to another character by Dragging & Dropping the selected item from the items window or the gold from the character window to the name of the receiving character in the party window.
\par 
\par \b\cf1 Switch To
\par \plain\fs20 This will cause all character information windows to reflect information about the select character, and cause all commands to switch over to that specific character.  The difference in using this option versus the ALT-<character number> is that this option updates all of the informational windows.  Using ALT-<character number> only changes who the current commands are for (unless in the City).  One can also double-click on the Character's Name to automatically switch to that character.
\par \pard\li175 
\par \b\cf1 Leave
\par \plain\fs20 Selecting this option will remove the selected character from the party.
\par 
\par \b\cf1 Options
\par \plain\fs20 Will bring up the following screen.\fs24 
\par \pard \fs20 
\par \b\fs24 The Party Options Window
\par \{bml bm6.bmp\}\plain\fs20  From here, a player is able to set the general party information and default combat information for each member of the party.
\par \fs24 
\par \pard\li175 \b\fs20\cf1 Combat Settings
\par \plain\fs20 This is the default setting for the selected character when combat starts.  None, Fight, Defend, or a spell buffer can be selected.  This setting can be changed during combat by switching to the specified character (using ALT-<character number>) and selecting another option.\fs24 
\par \pard 
\par \pard\li175 \b\fs20\cf1 Party Settings
\par \plain\fs20 These are the general settings for the party.\fs24 
\par \pard \fs20 
\par \b Character Interaction\plain\fs24 
\par \pard\li175 \fs20 Any character that is a member of the party can interact (i.e. cast spells on, give to, etc.) with any other character that is a member of the party.
\par 
\par If a player wishes to Give items to another character, but doesn\'92t want to run around in the dungeon with the other character, simply add the other character to the party, give the items, then have the character Leave the party.\fs24 
\par \pard \fs20 
\par \b Moving Around\plain\fs24 
\par \pard\li175 \fs20 Walking around and casting movement spells (i.e. Teleport) can be done by any member of the party.  If the party leader hits a teleporter that\'92s random, all members of the party will probably disappear, and the leader will be alone, returning to single-character play.  Keep in mind that if the Leader of the party casts Teleport and lands in Rock, all members of the party will also land in Rock.\fs24 
\par \pard \fs20 
\par \b Combat\plain\fs24 
\par \pard\li175 \fs20 Combat is where the fun starts.  Since it takes place in real time, a player must be quick at the keyboard with switching between characters to select what option they wish carried out for the current round.  If a character has a default option other than "none\'94 set for combat, that option will automatically be executed every round unless it has been interrupted by the player.
\par 
\par In the dungeon, when the player presses ALT-<character number>, the Dungeon Commands windows "focus\'94 is switched to the specified character and the character\'92s buffer window is updated to show the current character.  Once a character is "switched to\'94, all commands made will be the selected characters commands for combat.  Below is an example of a combat situation with a party of three.
\par \pard\li175 \fs24 
\par \pard\li355 \fs20\cf1 Example
\par \plain\fs20 The party walks into a room containing three groups of monsters, which the player realizes are pretty nasty.  Since focus is on the party leader, the player hits "shift-5\'94 to cast a spell from buffer 5.  They then press \'91N\'92 to move to the next character (i.e. Character 2) and press \'912\'92 to select monster group 2 then \'91f\'92 to engage in fighting.  The user then presses \'91N\'92 once again to select party member 3 and presses \'913\'92 to select monster group 3 and then Shift-6 to use an item that is in spell buffer 6.
\par \pard\li355 And now, when the round takes place, character one will cast a spell on monster group 1, character two will attack the 2nd monster group, and character three will use their item (#6) on monster group 3.  After the round is over, the player can then choose their combat options once again.\fs24 
\par \pard \fs20 
\par \b Experience\plain\fs24 
\par \pard\li175 \fs20 Experience isn\'92t distributed any differently for a party than that of a single character.  Whoever hits the monster and/or kills the monster will receive the experience - nobody else.  However, the amount of experience that a character earns for hitting/killing a monster (or casting a spell, etc.) will be less for larger parties.  For best experience, run solo!\fs24 
\par \pard \fs20 
\par \b Quests\plain\fs24 
\par \pard\li175 \fs20 If one or more members of a group are quested for a specific monster that was just killed by the quested character (or a companion) or another character, all members that had that monster for a quest will receive credit for the kill.\fs24 
\par \pard \fs20 
\par \b Messages\plain\fs24 
\par \pard\li175 \fs20 Certain messages will appear when something out of the ordinary happens to a character, or when a character is close to death.  Some examples of messages:\fs24 
\par \pard\li355 \fs20\cf1 "Crashland\'94 has been paralyzed!
\par "Sork\'94 is now a statue!
\par Crashland - "Help!  My hits are 15/250!\'94
\par Thief - "Thanks for the Potion of Fitness, Sork!\'94\plain\fs24 
\par \pard\li175 \fs20\cf1 
\par \plain\fs20 It is very important for a player to keep an eye on all messages that appear, since they may be of importance.
\par \fs24 
\par \pard \b\fs20 Treasure & Traps\plain\fs24 
\par \pard\li175 \fs20 All gold found after combat or from a chest is split evenly between all characters that are still alive.  If a character other than the leader opens a chest and triggers a Teleport trap, they will disappear from the party.  If the Leader opens a chest and triggers a Teleport trap, they will disappear and the next character in line will become the Party leader.\fs24 
\par \pard \fs20 
\par \b Dying\plain\fs24 
\par \pard\li175 \fs20 When a  member of the party dies, they automatically are unloaded and treated like any other dead character.  If the party leader dies, the character next in line will become the new leader.  If all members of the party die, the last "selected\'94 character will become the main character and the party window will disappear.\fs24 
\par \pard \fs20 
\par \b Character Windows & Layout\plain\fs24 
\par \pard\li175 \fs20 The layout of the Mordor Character Windows will always reflect those of the Party Leader.  If one loads a party of four and changes the size & position of the windows, these changes will only reflect upon the party leader.  This means if another party member is loaded up individually, they will have their own window configuration intact.\fs24 
\par \pard \fs20 
\par \b Exiting\plain\fs24 
\par \pard\li175 \fs20 When a party leader has had enough for the day and exits Mordor, the character will be asked if they wish to have the party reorganized when they return.  If the character answers yes, the next time they are run, the other characters that were in the party will rejoin (if they are still in the same area and not dead).\fs24 
\par \pard \fs20 
\par \b Summary\plain\fs24 
\par \pard\li175 \fs20 All in all, the game functions just as it does in single-character mode, except that the player has the option of switching between characters and having the characters interact with each other.
\par 
\par Also, keep in mind that regulating a party of characters takes some time to learn and can be tricky, so be sure to be patient and careful when running around a group of characters.  It is recommended that players new to this feature run the upper levels to get the feel of controlling multiple characters in combat.\fs24 
\par \pard \fs20 
\par \i\cf2 Move to the next section to read about Commands.
\par Move to the previous section to read about Dying.
\par \page
{\up +}
{\up $}
{\up #}
\pard\keepn \plain\b\fs28 Protection Spells\plain\fs24 
\par \pard 
\par \fs20 Created by the Sorcerer\'92s guild, spells of this type cause the caster, or character receiving the spell, to be protected by an invisible field.  The power of these fields depends on the skill level of the caster.
\par \fs24 
\par \pard\li175 \b\fs20 Protection\tab 
\par \plain\fs20 Base Level: 3\tab Guilds: Sor, Wiz (15)
\par Required Stats: 11 Int, 11 Wis, 11 Cha\tab 
\par \i NON-COMBAT Spell, creates a protective field around the receiving character.
\par \plain\fs20 This spell will create a protective field around the receiving character, making it harder for attacking creatures to do damage.
\par  \tab  
\par \b Mass Protection\tab 
\par \plain\fs20 Base Level: 8\tab Guilds: Sor\fs24 
\par \fs20 Required Stats: 14 Str, 18 Int, 18 Wis, 12 Con, 12 Cha\tab 
\par \i NON-COMBAT Spell, creates a protective field around every character in a party.
\par \pard\li175 \plain\fs20 This spell does exactly what Protection does, except that it affects the entire party.
\par \fs24 
\par \pard \i\fs20\cf2 Move to the next section to see the list of Nomad Spells.
\par Move to the previous section to read about Location Spells.
\par \page
{\up +}
{\up $}
{\up #}
\pard\keepn \plain\fs24 
\par \b\fs28 \{ewl FH_BMP.DLL,FH_BMP,thief.bmp\}Races\line
\line
\plain\i\fs22\cf3 \'93Let us all come together and decide our fate, for only fortune and glory, misery and death exist in the depths below.  \line
Is it risk or challenge that you seek?\'94\line
\tab - \b \'93Sh\'92lan\'94, City Governess\plain\fs24 
\par 
\par \pard 
\par \fs20 The race you choose for your character is very important because it affects quite a few things, including what guilds you can join, what alignment (either Good, Neutral or Evil) you can be, how fast you learn and what your maximum statistics can be.  Below is a brief summary and description of each race available in the game.
\par \fs24 
\par \pard\li175 \b\fs20\cf1 Human
\par \plain\fs20 Humans are something you, as a player, can relate to.  They have no natural resistances, but are the most versatile of all races and are allowed in every guild.  They have the shortest life span, but are the quickest learners.
\par 
\par \b\cf1 Elf
\par \plain\fs20 Elves are the magic users of the game.  Tall and slender, most Elves become either Mages, Sorcerers, Healers or Wizards.  They are excellent spell casters and can live longer than any other race. They are not, however, very good at fighting with weapons and have a low constitution.  Elves also have a natural resistance to Magical and Mind attacks.  Because of their lack of physical strength, there are some items (which require great strength) that Elves can never use.
\par \pard\li175 
\par \b\cf1 Giant
\par \plain\fs20 Giants live for one thing - slicing a monster in two with one blow.  Known for their brutal ways and having the advantage of being over eight feet tall, they make the best Warriors one can find.  The only guilds to accept them are the Nomad, Seeker and Warrior guilds.  Because of their size and bulk, Giants are resistant to most forms of attack, including Fire, Cold and Electrical.  Poison and Disease don\'92t seriously affect them either.
\par 
\par \b\cf1 Gnome
\par \plain\fs20 Being very charismatic and possessing a slight resistance to Mind attacks, Gnomes make excellent Mages.  Mostly good by nature, Gnomes are usually found in the Mage, Healer and Paladin guilds.
\par \pard\li175 
\par \b\cf1 Dwarf
\par \plain\fs20 Dwarves are very curious, always poking at chests, injured characters, and carcasses.  Neutral in nature and stockier than most races, Dwarves are found in quite a  number of guilds, ranging from Warriors to Wizards.  They are also fairly resistant to the elements (fire, cold, etc.).
\par 
\par \b\cf1 Ogre
\par \plain\fs20 Somewhat dim-witted, Ogres are bulky and hairy, and make good Warriors and Scavengers.  Since their constitution and resistances to such elements as Fire and Cold are so high, they are very hard to kill, but their low intelligence is quite often their downfall.
\par \pard\li175 
\par \b\cf1 Morloch
\par \plain\fs20 Morlochs are huge masses of walking fur and muscle.  Possessing a great deal of natural magic, they make excellent magic-users.  However, because they are so ugly, they cannot easily charm some monsters, and their life span is almost as short as a humans.  They also have a pretty good resistance to certain forms of monster attacks ( e.g. poison, disease).
\par 
\par \b\cf1 Osiri
\par \plain\fs20 Osiris, which are distant relatives of the elves that have shifted to a more human-like race, are extremely dexterous and are mostly found in the Thief and Scavenger guilds.  They also make marginal spell casters and are almost completely resistant to Electrical and Mind attacks.
\par \pard\li175 
\par \b\cf1 Troll
\par \plain\fs20 A cross between an Ogre and an Elf, Trolls are strong and swift creatures that possess a few natural resistances.  Making excellent Ninjas and Scavengers, they are quick to take up sides (either Good or Evil), but can sometimes be found as Neutral.  Due to the aggressiveness in relation to their alignment, many guilds will not allow them.\fs24 
\par \pard 
\par \b\fs20\cf1 Additional Topics:\plain\fs24 
\par \uldb \fs20 Race Statistics\plain\fs20 
\par 
\par \i\cf2 Move to the next section to read about Race Statistics.
\par Move to the previous section to read about Character Information.
\par \page
{\up +}
{\up $}
{\up #}
\pard\keepn \plain\b\fs28 Races: Statistics\plain\fs24 
\par \pard 
\par \b\fs20\cf1 Race Statistics and Alignments
\par \plain\fs20 Below is some information about each race\'92s minimum and maximum statistics and what alignments the particular races can be.\fs24 
\par    
\par \trowd\trgaph25\trleft-26 \cellx975\cellx1385\cellx1785\cellx2305\cellx2825\cellx3345\cellx3865\cellx4375\cellx4895\cellx5225\cellx5555\cellx5895\pard\intbl \b\fs20 Race\plain\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl \pard\intbl\qc \b\fs20 Age\plain\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \b\fs20 Exp\plain\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \b\fs20 Str\plain\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \b\fs20 Int\plain\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \b\fs20 Wis\plain\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \b\fs20 Con\plain\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \pard\intbl\qr \b\fs20 Cha\plain\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \b\fs20 Dex\plain\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \pard\intbl\qc \b\fs20 G\plain\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \b\fs20 N\plain\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \b\fs20 E\plain\fs24 \cell\intbl\row
\trowd\trgaph25\trleft-26 \cellx975\cellx1385\cellx1785\cellx2305\cellx2825\cellx3345\cellx3865\cellx4375\cellx4895\cellx5225\cellx5555\cellx5895\pard\intbl\qc \pard\intbl \fs20 Human\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 100\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 3\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 4\'5c17\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 4\'5c18\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 4\'5c18\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 6\'5c17\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 5\'5c18\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 6\'5c18\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 X\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 X\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 X\fs24 \cell\intbl\row
\trowd\trgaph25\trleft-26 \cellx975\cellx1385\cellx1785\cellx2305\cellx2825\cellx3345\cellx3865\cellx4375\cellx4895\cellx5225\cellx5555\cellx5895\pard\intbl\qc \pard\intbl \fs20 Elf\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 400\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 7\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 3\'5c15\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 7\'5c20\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 7\'5c20\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 3\'5c16\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 3\'5c18\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 3\'5c18\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 X\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 X\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 X\fs24 \cell\intbl\row
\trowd\trgaph25\trleft-26 \cellx975\cellx1385\cellx1785\cellx2305\cellx2825\cellx3345\cellx3865\cellx4375\cellx4895\cellx5225\cellx5555\cellx5895\pard\intbl\qc \pard\intbl \fs20 Giant\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 225\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 7\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 12\'5c25\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 4\'5c17\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 3\'5c17\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 9\'5c19\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 2\'5c16\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 3\'5c18\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \pard\intbl\qc \fs20  \fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 X\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \fs20  \fs24 \cell\intbl\row
\trowd\trgaph25\trleft-26 \cellx975\cellx1385\cellx1785\cellx2305\cellx2825\cellx3345\cellx3865\cellx4375\cellx4895\cellx5225\cellx5555\cellx5895\pard\intbl\qc \pard\intbl \fs20 Gnome\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 300\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 7\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 4\'5c17\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 7\'5c19\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 5\'5c19\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 3\'5c17\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 9\'5c22\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 6\'5c18\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 X\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 X\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 X\fs24 \cell\intbl\row
\trowd\trgaph25\trleft-26 \cellx975\cellx1385\cellx1785\cellx2305\cellx2825\cellx3345\cellx3865\cellx4375\cellx4895\cellx5225\cellx5555\cellx5895\pard\intbl\qc \pard\intbl \fs20 Dwarf\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 275\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 5\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 3\'5c18\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 3\'5c18\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 7\'5c19\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 3\'5c19\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 3\'5c17\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 5\'5c18\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \pard\intbl\qc \fs20  \fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 X\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \fs20  \fs24 \cell\intbl\row
\trowd\trgaph25\trleft-26 \cellx975\cellx1385\cellx1785\cellx2305\cellx2825\cellx3345\cellx3865\cellx4375\cellx4895\cellx5225\cellx5555\cellx5895\pard\intbl\qc \pard\intbl \fs20 Ogre\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 265\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 6\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 9\'5c20\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 3\'5c16\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 3\'5c16\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 9\'5c21\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 3\'5c18\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 5\'5c17\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 X\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 X\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 X\fs24 \cell\intbl\row
\trowd\trgaph25\trleft-26 \cellx975\cellx1385\cellx1785\cellx2305\cellx2825\cellx3345\cellx3865\cellx4375\cellx4895\cellx5225\cellx5555\cellx5895\pard\intbl\qc \pard\intbl \fs20 Morloch\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 175\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 4\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 6\'5c20\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 3\'5c17\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 5\'5c19\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 3\'5c15\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 2\'5c14\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 5\'5c20\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 X\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \fs20  \fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 X\fs24 \cell\intbl\row
\trowd\trgaph25\trleft-26 \cellx975\cellx1385\cellx1785\cellx2305\cellx2825\cellx3345\cellx3865\cellx4375\cellx4895\cellx5225\cellx5555\cellx5895\pard\intbl\qc \pard\intbl \fs20 Osiri\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 325\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 8\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 5\'5c17\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 3\'5c18\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 3\'5c17\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 7\'5c19\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 3\'5c18\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 10\'5c22\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \pard\intbl\qc \fs20  \fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 X\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \fs20  \fs24 \cell\intbl\row
\trowd\trgaph25\trleft-26 \cellx975\cellx1385\cellx1785\cellx2305\cellx2825\cellx3345\cellx3865\cellx4375\cellx4895\cellx5225\cellx5555\cellx5895\pard\intbl\qc \pard\intbl \fs20 Troll\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 285\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 9\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 6\'5c20\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 3\'5c18\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 3\'5c18\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 6\'5c19\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 3\'5c17\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 6\'5c20\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 X\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 X\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 X\fs24 \cell\intbl\row
\pard 
\par \fs20\cf1 Age:\b  \plain\fs20 Is only an approximate indicator.  There a is very small chance that a character could die before that age, but as one approaches the age listed, the chance of dying increases.
\par \cf1 Exp:\b  \plain\fs20 The higher the number, the more experience is needed to make a level.
\par \cf1 Stats & Alignments:\b  \plain\fs20 The numbers under the stats are in a low/high format.  For example: Str 7/17 means that a character of that race cannot start with a Strength of less than 7, nor greater than 17.  You may not raise a NATURAL stat more than 5 above the maximum listed above.  G,N and E represent the alignments the specified races can be.\fs24 
\par \pard 
\par \fs20 
\par \b\cf1 Race Guild Chart
\par \plain\fs24 
\par \trowd\trgaph25\trleft-26 \cellx975\cellx1275\cellx1565\cellx1865\cellx2165\cellx2465\cellx2755\cellx3055\cellx3355\cellx3655\cellx3945\cellx4245\cellx4545\cellx5555\cellx6835\pard\intbl \b\fs20 Race\cell\pard \pard\intbl \pard\intbl\qc A\cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc B\cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc C\cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc D\cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc E\cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc F\cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc G\cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc H\cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc I\cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc J\cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc K\cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc L\cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \pard\intbl\qr \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \pard\intbl Guilds\plain\fs24 \cell\intbl\row
\trowd\trgaph25\trleft-26 \cellx975\cellx1275\cellx1565\cellx1865\cellx2165\cellx2465\cellx2755\cellx3055\cellx3355\cellx3655\cellx3945\cellx4245\cellx4545\cellx5555\cellx6835\pard\intbl \fs20 Human\cell\pard \pard\intbl \pard\intbl\qc X\cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc X\cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc X\cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc X\cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc X\cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc X\cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc X\cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc X\cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc X\cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc X\cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc X\cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc X\cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \pard\intbl\qr \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \pard\intbl A Nomad\fs24 \cell\intbl\row
\trowd\trgaph25\trleft-26 \cellx975\cellx1275\cellx1565\cellx1865\cellx2165\cellx2465\cellx2755\cellx3055\cellx3355\cellx3655\cellx3945\cellx4245\cellx4545\cellx5555\cellx6835\pard\intbl \fs20 Elf\cell\pard \pard\intbl \pard\intbl\qc X\cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc  \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc X\cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc  \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc  \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc X\cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc X\cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc X\cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc X\cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc X\cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc X\cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc X\cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \pard\intbl\qr \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \pard\intbl B Warrior\fs24 \cell\intbl\row
\trowd\trgaph25\trleft-26 \cellx975\cellx1275\cellx1565\cellx1865\cellx2165\cellx2465\cellx2755\cellx3055\cellx3355\cellx3655\cellx3945\cellx4245\cellx4545\cellx5555\cellx6835\pard\intbl \fs20 Giant\cell\pard \pard\intbl \pard\intbl\qc X\cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc X\cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc  \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc  \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc  \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc X\cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc  \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc  \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc  \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc  \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc  \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc  \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \pard\intbl\qr \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \pard\intbl C Paladin\fs24 \cell\intbl\row
\trowd\trgaph25\trleft-26 \cellx975\cellx1275\cellx1565\cellx1865\cellx2165\cellx2465\cellx2755\cellx3055\cellx3355\cellx3655\cellx3945\cellx4245\cellx4545\cellx5555\cellx6835\pard\intbl \fs20 Gnome\cell\pard \pard\intbl \pard\intbl\qc X\cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc  \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc X\cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc  \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc X\cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc X\cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc X\cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc X\cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc X\cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc X\cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc  \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc X\cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \pard\intbl\qr \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \pard\intbl D Ninja\fs24 \cell\intbl\row
\trowd\trgaph25\trleft-26 \cellx975\cellx1275\cellx1565\cellx1865\cellx2165\cellx2465\cellx2755\cellx3055\cellx3355\cellx3655\cellx3945\cellx4245\cellx4545\cellx5555\cellx6835\pard\intbl \fs20 Dwarf\cell\pard \pard\intbl \pard\intbl\qc X\cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc X\cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc  \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc  \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc  \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc X\cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc X\cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc X\cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc  \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc X\cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc X\cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc X\cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \pard\intbl\qr \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \pard\intbl E Villain\fs24 \cell\intbl\row
\trowd\trgaph25\trleft-26 \cellx975\cellx1275\cellx1565\cellx1865\cellx2165\cellx2465\cellx2755\cellx3055\cellx3355\cellx3655\cellx3945\cellx4245\cellx4545\cellx5555\cellx6835\pard\intbl \fs20 Ogre\cell\pard \pard\intbl \pard\intbl\qc X\cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc X\cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc  \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc  \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc  \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc  \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc  \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc X\cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc  \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc  \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc  \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc  \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \pard\intbl\qr \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \pard\intbl F Seeker\fs24 \cell\intbl\row
\trowd\trgaph25\trleft-26 \cellx975\cellx1275\cellx1565\cellx1865\cellx2165\cellx2465\cellx2755\cellx3055\cellx3355\cellx3655\cellx3945\cellx4245\cellx4545\cellx5555\cellx6835\pard\intbl \fs20 Morloch\cell\pard \pard\intbl \pard\intbl\qc X\cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc X\cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc  \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc  \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc X\cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc X\cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc  \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc X\cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc X\cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc X\cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc  \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc  \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \pard\intbl\qr \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \pard\intbl G Thief\fs24 \cell\intbl\row
\trowd\trgaph25\trleft-26 \cellx975\cellx1275\cellx1565\cellx1865\cellx2165\cellx2465\cellx2755\cellx3055\cellx3355\cellx3655\cellx3945\cellx4245\cellx4545\cellx5555\cellx6835\pard\intbl \fs20 Osiri\cell\pard \pard\intbl \pard\intbl\qc X\cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc  \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc  \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc  \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc  \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc X\cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc X\cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc X\cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc  \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc X\cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc X\cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc X\cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \pard\intbl\qr \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \pard\intbl H Scavenger\fs24 \cell\intbl\row
\trowd\trgaph25\trleft-26 \cellx975\cellx1275\cellx1565\cellx1865\cellx2165\cellx2465\cellx2755\cellx3055\cellx3355\cellx3655\cellx3945\cellx4245\cellx4545\cellx5555\cellx6835\pard\intbl \fs20 Troll\cell\pard \pard\intbl \pard\intbl\qc X\cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc  \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc  \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc X\cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc X\cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc  \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc X\cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc X\cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc  \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc  \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc  \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc  \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \pard\intbl\qr \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \pard\intbl I Mage\fs24 \cell\intbl\row
\trowd\trgaph25\trleft-26 \cellx975\cellx1275\cellx1565\cellx1865\cellx2165\cellx2465\cellx2755\cellx3055\cellx3355\cellx3655\cellx3945\cellx4245\cellx4545\cellx5555\cellx6835\pard\intbl \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \pard\intbl\qc \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \pard\intbl\qr \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \pard\intbl J Sorcerer\fs24 \cell\intbl\row
\trowd\trgaph25\trleft-26 \cellx975\cellx1275\cellx1565\cellx1865\cellx2165\cellx2465\cellx2755\cellx3055\cellx3355\cellx3655\cellx3945\cellx4245\cellx4545\cellx5555\cellx6835\pard\intbl \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \pard\intbl\qc \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \pard\intbl\qr \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \pard\intbl K Wizard\fs24 \cell\intbl\row
\trowd\trgaph25\trleft-26 \cellx975\cellx1275\cellx1565\cellx1865\cellx2165\cellx2465\cellx2755\cellx3055\cellx3355\cellx3655\cellx3945\cellx4245\cellx4545\cellx5555\cellx6835\pard\intbl \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \pard\intbl\qc \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \pard\intbl\qr \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \pard\intbl L Healer\fs24 \cell\intbl\row
\pard \fs20 
\par An \'91X\'92 indicates that a character of the given race may join the listed guild.  All characters are automatically members of the Nomad guild upon creation.  There are other requirements to join a guild.  For example, you must have a minimum intelligence of 11 to join the Mage\'92s guild.  More information about the Guild requirements is presented in the \uldb Guilds\plain\fs20  Section.
\par 
\par 
\par \b\cf1 Race Statistic & Resistance Chart\plain\fs24 
\par 
\par \fs20 Many races are naturally resistant to the elements (i.e. Fire, Cold, etc.) and other forms of attack (i.e. Poison, Disease, Stone, etc).  Below is a chart that shows the size of each race and their natural resistances (if any).\fs24 
\par \pard \b\cf1    \plain\fs24 
\par \trowd\trgaph25\trleft-26 \cellx725\cellx1735\cellx2305\cellx2885\cellx3455\cellx4035\cellx4615\cellx5185\cellx5765\cellx6335\cellx6915\cellx7495\cellx8065\pard\intbl \b\fs20 Race\plain\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl \pard\intbl\qr \b\fs20 Size\plain\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \pard\intbl\qc \b\fs20 A\plain\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \b\fs20 B\plain\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \b\fs20 C\plain\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \b\fs20 D\plain\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \b\fs20 E\plain\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \b\fs20 F\plain\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \b\fs20 G\plain\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \b\fs20 H\plain\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \b\fs20 I\plain\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \b\fs20 J\plain\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \b\fs20 K\plain\fs24 \cell\intbl\row
\trowd\trgaph25\trleft-26 \cellx725\cellx1735\cellx2305\cellx2885\cellx3455\cellx4035\cellx4615\cellx5185\cellx5765\cellx6335\cellx6915\cellx7495\cellx8065\pard\intbl\qc \pard\intbl \fs20 Human\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 Normal\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 -\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 -\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 -\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 -\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 -\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 -\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 -\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 -\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 -\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 -\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 -\fs24 \cell\intbl\row
\trowd\trgaph25\trleft-26 \cellx725\cellx1735\cellx2305\cellx2885\cellx3455\cellx4035\cellx4615\cellx5185\cellx5765\cellx6335\cellx6915\cellx7495\cellx8065\pard\intbl\qc \pard\intbl \fs20 Elf\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 Small\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 -\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 -\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 -\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 50%\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 -\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 -\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 80%\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 -\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 -\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 -\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 -\fs24 \cell\intbl\row
\trowd\trgaph25\trleft-26 \cellx725\cellx1735\cellx2305\cellx2885\cellx3455\cellx4035\cellx4615\cellx5185\cellx5765\cellx6335\cellx6915\cellx7495\cellx8065\pard\intbl\qc \pard\intbl \fs20 Giant\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 Very Big\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 50%\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 50%\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 50%\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 -\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 50%\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 50%\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 -\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 25%\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 50%\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 50%\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 -\fs24 \cell\intbl\row
\trowd\trgaph25\trleft-26 \cellx725\cellx1735\cellx2305\cellx2885\cellx3455\cellx4035\cellx4615\cellx5185\cellx5765\cellx6335\cellx6915\cellx7495\cellx8065\pard\intbl\qc \pard\intbl \fs20 Gnome\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 Normal\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 -\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 -\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 -\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 40%\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 -\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 -\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 -\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 -\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 -\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 -\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 -\fs24 \cell\intbl\row
\trowd\trgaph25\trleft-26 \cellx725\cellx1735\cellx2305\cellx2885\cellx3455\cellx4035\cellx4615\cellx5185\cellx5765\cellx6335\cellx6915\cellx7495\cellx8065\pard\intbl\qc \pard\intbl \fs20 Dwarf\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 Small\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 45%\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 80%\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 -\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 -\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 50%\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 50%\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 -\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 40%\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 50%\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 90%\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 -\fs24 \cell\intbl\row
\trowd\trgaph25\trleft-26 \cellx725\cellx1735\cellx2305\cellx2885\cellx3455\cellx4035\cellx4615\cellx5185\cellx5765\cellx6335\cellx6915\cellx7495\cellx8065\pard\intbl\qc \pard\intbl \fs20 Ogre\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 Big\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 75%\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 75%\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 -\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 -\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 50%\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 -\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 -\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 50%\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 75%\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 75%\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 15%\fs24 \cell\intbl\row
\trowd\trgaph25\trleft-26 \cellx725\cellx1735\cellx2305\cellx2885\cellx3455\cellx4035\cellx4615\cellx5185\cellx5765\cellx6335\cellx6915\cellx7495\cellx8065\pard\intbl\qc \pard\intbl \fs20 Morloch\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 Normal\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 35%\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 35%\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 35%\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 50%\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 -\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 -\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 40%\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 -\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 95%\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 65%\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 50%\fs24 \cell\intbl\row
\trowd\trgaph25\trleft-26 \cellx725\cellx1735\cellx2305\cellx2885\cellx3455\cellx4035\cellx4615\cellx5185\cellx5765\cellx6335\cellx6915\cellx7495\cellx8065\pard\intbl\qc \pard\intbl \fs20 Osiri\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 Normal\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 -\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 -\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 90%\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 90%\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 -\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 -\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 -\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 90%\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 -\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 -\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 90%\fs24 \cell\intbl\row
\trowd\trgaph25\trleft-26 \cellx725\cellx1735\cellx2305\cellx2885\cellx3455\cellx4035\cellx4615\cellx5185\cellx5765\cellx6335\cellx6915\cellx7495\cellx8065\pard\intbl\qc \pard\intbl \fs20 Troll\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl \pard\intbl\qr \fs20 Normal\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qr \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 -\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 -\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 -\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 -\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 45%\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 45%\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 -\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 -\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 45%\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 65%\fs24 \cell\pard \pard\intbl\qc \fs20 25%\fs24 \cell\intbl\row
\pard 
\par \fs20\cf1 Size:\b  \plain\fs20 The size of a character affects how well they do in combat and in other situations.  Larger characters tend to be harder to kill while the smaller characters are harder to hit.\fs24 
\par \fs20 
\par \cf1 Resistances
\par \plain\fs20 A character\'92s natural resistance to specific forms of attack and other hazards.
\par A - Fire\tab \tab E - Disease\tab I - Paralysis
\par B - Cold\tab \tab F - Poison\tab J - Drain
\par C - Electrical\tab G - Magic\tab K - Acid
\par D - Mind\tab H - Stone
\par 
\par \i\cf2 Move to the next section to read about Creating a Character.
\par \pard Move to the previous section to read about Races.
\par \page
{\up +}
{\up $}
{\up #}
\pard\keepn \plain\b\fs28 Resistant Spells\plain\fs24 
\par \pard 
\par \fs20 Initially created by the Sorcerers guild to protect themselves from their own destructive forces, these spells are very useful in increasing the resistance of a character from many forms of attack.  The Healers guild also helped in this study and created spells to increase ones resistance to Poison and Disease.
\par \fs24 
\par \pard\li175 \b\fs20 Resist Fire\tab 
\par \plain\fs20 Base Level: 3\tab Guilds: See (9), Sor, Wiz (9), Hea (6)
\par Required Stats: 13 Int, 13 Wis, 13 Cha\tab 
\par \i NON-COMBAT Spell, will raise the recipient\'92s Fire Resistance to 95%.
\par \plain\fs20  \tab  
\par \b Resist Draining\tab 
\par \plain\fs20 Base Level: 3\tab Guilds: See (9), Sor, Wiz (9), Hea (6)
\par Required Stats: 13 Int, 13 Wis, 10 Con, 13 Cha\tab 
\par \i NON-COMBAT Spell, will raise the recipient\'92s Drain Resistance to 95%.
\par \plain\fs20  \tab  
\par \b Resist Cold\tab 
\par \plain\fs20 Base Level: 3\tab Guilds: See (9), Sor, Wiz (9), Hea (6)
\par \pard\li175 Required Stats: 14 Int, 14 Wis, 10 Con, 12 Cha\tab 
\par \i NON-COMBAT Spell, will raise the recipient\'92s Cold Resistance to 95%.
\par \plain\fs20  \tab  
\par \b Resist Poison\tab 
\par \plain\fs20 Base Level: 4\tab Guilds: See (12), Sor, Wiz (12), Hea (8)
\par Required Stats: 10 Int, 12 Wis, 10 Con, 10 Cha\tab 
\par \i NON-COMBAT Spell, will raise the recipient\'92s Poison Resistance to 95%.
\par \plain\fs20  \tab  
\par \b Resist Disease\tab \plain\fs24 
\par \fs20 Base Level: 4\tab Guilds: See (12), Sor, Wiz (12), Hea (8)\fs24 
\par \fs20 Required Stats: 12 Int, 12 Wis, 10 Con, 12 Cha\tab 
\par \pard\li175 \i NON-COMBAT Spell, will raise the recipient\'92s Disease Resistance to 95%.
\par \plain\fs20  \tab  
\par \b Resist Paralysis\tab \plain\fs24 
\par \fs20 Base Level: 4\tab Guilds: See (12), Sor, Wiz (12), Hea (8)\fs24 
\par \fs20 Required Stats: 14 Int, 16 Wis, 8 Con, 12 Dex\tab 
\par \i NON-COMBAT Spell, will raise the recipient\'92s Paralysis Resistance to 95%.
\par \plain\fs20  \tab  
\par \b Resist Stoning\tab \plain\fs24 
\par \fs20 Base Level: 4\tab Guilds: See (12), Sor, Wiz (12), Hea (8)\fs24 
\par \fs20 Required Stats: 12 Int, 13 Wis, 12 Con, 10 Cha\tab 
\par \i NON-COMBAT Spell, will raise the recipient\'92s Stone Resistance to 95%.
\par \pard\li175 \plain\fs20  \tab  
\par \b Resist Magic\tab 
\par \plain\fs20 Base Level: 5\tab Guilds: See (15), Sor, Wiz (15), Hea (10)
\par Required Stats: 14 Int, 12 Wis, 12 Con, 12 Cha\tab 
\par \i NON-COMBAT Spell, will raise the recipient\'92s Magic Resistance to 95%.
\par \plain\fs20  \tab  
\par \b Mental Resistance\tab 
\par \plain\fs20 Base Level: 6\tab Guilds: Sor, Wiz (18)
\par Required Stats: 18 Int, 14 Wis, 12 Con, 10 Cha\tab 
\par \i NON-COMBAT Spell, will raise the recipient\'92s Mental Resistance to 95%.
\par \plain\fs20  \tab  
\par \b Electrical Resistance\tab 
\par \plain\fs20 Base Level: 6\tab Guilds: Sor, Wiz (18)
\par \pard\li175 Required Stats: 12 Str, 12 Int, 16 Wis, 12 Con\tab 
\par \i NON-COMBAT Spell, will raise the recipient\'92s Electrical Resistance to 95%.
\par \plain\fs20  \tab  
\par \b Resist Acidity\tab 
\par \plain\fs20 Base Level: 6\tab Guilds: Sor, Wiz (18)
\par Required Stats: 10 Str, 13 Int, 10 Wis, 15 Con\tab 
\par \i NON-COMBAT Spell, will raise the recipient\'92s Acidity Resistance to 95%.\plain\fs24 
\par \pard \i\fs20 
\par \cf2 Move to the next section to read about Visual Spells.
\par Move to the previous section to read about Dispell Spells.
\par \page
{\up +}
{\up $}
{\up #}
\pard\keepn \plain\fs24 
\par \b\fs28 \{ewl FH_BMP.DLL,FH_BMP,mage.bmp\}Spells\line
\line
\plain\i\fs22\cf3 \'93Magic is the foundation for all life.  In order to sustain life or inflict death, one must learn the use of magic.\'94\line
\tab - \b \'93Morgul\'94, Master of the Sorcerer\'92s Guild\plain\fs24 
\par 
\par \pard 
\par \fs20 Magic is the most important aspect of Mordor.  Each guild has certain spells that its members can cast.  As a character learns new spells from joined guilds, they will be added to the character\'92s Spellbook, making them available to cast.  A spell can be \'91cast\'92 by the player, or it can be cast from of an item with magical properties (i.e. \'91Potion of Sight\'92).  When a player casts a spell from their Spellbook, some spell points will be used.  The number of spell points that a spell will take depends on the level of the spell and the power of the character.  A more powerful spell will take more spell points to cast.  As you advance in the guild, lower level spells will take fewer spell points, allowing you to cast them more often.  Upon returning to the city, your spell points will be restored to their maximum capacity.  The maximum amount of spell points a character can have is based on the characters Intelligence and Wisdom.  A character cannot cast a spell if they do not have enough spell points.
\par \pard 
\par The effectiveness of a spell is based on the Spell Level (shown in the Character Stats window) of the guild a character is a member of that teaches the spell, which raises as a character becomes more powerful (makes levels in the guild).  This means that a Level 50 Mage who is also a level 20 Wizard will cast a shared spell (i.e. 'Dazzle') using the Mage's spell level (since it is higher than the Wizard's Spell Level).  However, if the Wizard's guild can cast the spell for less points than the Mage's guild, the lowest points will be used!
\par \pard 
\par When using the special abilities of an item to cast a spell, the highest spell level from all of the guilds the character is a member of is used unless the item casts a spell at a specific level (which can be found out by getting complete information on an item)..
\par \fs24 
\par \pard\li175 \fs20\cf1 Example of Casting a Spell
\par \plain\fs20 You can cast a spell while in the dungeon by pressing \'91c\'92 and typing in the full name (or the first few letters) of the spell you wish to cast.  You may also \'91load\'92 a spell in one of the 10 spell buffers, allowing you to cast a spell by pressing a shifted number key (see \'91Buffer Window\'92 in \uldb The Game Screen\plain\fs20  section for more information) or by double-clicking the buffer itself.\fs24 
\par \pard \fs20 
\par To cast a spell on another character, such as \'91heal\'92 or \'91resist poison\'92, the character must be in the current party.  For more information, please refer to the \uldb Parties\plain\fs20  section in this Helplesson
\par 
\par Some monsters have partial immunity to certain spells while some have complete immunity to all spells.  For example, a fire spell won\'92t work on certain dragons.  The higher the level of the character, the better the chance of affecting a monster with partial immunity to magic (total immunity can never be negated).
\par \pard 
\par \b\fs24\cf1 Spell Power & Damage\plain\fs24 
\par \pard\tx-5 \fs20 Spells that inflict damage or heal hits have two numbers associated with them - a power & damage (or heal) rating (e.g. '15/2').  This rating includes a \i Base\plain\fs20  number and a \i LevelModifier\plain\fs20  number for the spell.  The \i Base\plain\fs20  number represents the base (average starting) amount of healing/damage points the spell will do.  \i LevelModifier\plain\fs20  is the rate at which <base> raises based on the casters spell level.  So, a damage spell of 15/2 means that it starts with an average of 15 hits damage and raises at a rate of 2, which is not much at all.  This means that a caster with a spell level of 25 probably wouldn\'92t do much more than 20 points of damage with this spell.  However, if we had a spell of 15/15, a spell level of 25 would probably do damage in the 100\'92s because the \i LevelModifier\plain\fs20  value is like a 'focus' value for the casters spell level (i.e. a higher focus number, the higher the additional Base Damage from the caster's spell level).
\par \pard\tx-5 
\par There really isn't an equation to tell exactly how many points of damage a certain spell (say 30/15) will do when cast at a given spell level since there can be too many other variables involved (i.e. target's resistances, size, etc.).  The player generally must learn by experience and get a 'feel' for the Base/Levelmodifier system works.  
\par 
\par \b\fs24\cf1 Spell Levels\plain\fs24 
\par \pard \fs20 Even though a spell may list as Spell Level 2, some guilds may learn the spell later, say at level 4 or 6.  This all depends on the spell learning abilities of a guild.  A good example is the Charm of Opening spell, which is Spell Level 3 for the Thief\'92s guild, but Spell Level 12 for  the Nomad\'92s guild.  In general, Guilds that specialize in spells (i.e. Sorcerers and Fire/Cold spells) will learn a spell before any other guild that has access to the spell.
\par 
\par \b\fs24\cf1 Base Level, Required Stats and Description\plain\fs24 
\par \pard\tx-5 \fs20 Each spell has Base Level at which the spell is generally learned.  When only one guild has access to a spell, the Base Level is the spell level at which the spells is learned.  However, many spells can be cast by more than one guild, but each guild can get access to the spell at different spell levels - if this is the case, the level at which the spell is learned at by a particular guild is listed after the guild name.  For example:
\par \fs24 
\par \pard\li175\tx-5 \fs20 Base Level: 3\tab Guilds: See (9), Sor, Wiz (9), Hea (6)\fs24 
\par \pard\tx-5 
\par \fs20 This information would mean the the Seekers and Wizards guild learns the spell at Spell Level 9, the Healers guild learns it at 6 and the Sorcerer's guild learns it at the Base Level of 3.
\par \fs24 
\par \pard\li175 \b\fs20\cf1 Required Stats\plain\fs24 
\par \pard\li175\tx-5 \fs20 If a spell has Required Stats, the caster must have the defined stats to cast the spell.  Unlike items, Required Stats for spells are based on Natural \i\b and\plain\fs20  Modified stats!\fs24 
\par \pard\tx-5 
\par \pard\li175 \b\fs20\cf1 Spell Information & Description\plain\fs24 
\par \pard\li175\tx-5 \fs20 Each spell has an 'information' line that follows the Required Stats information that states the 'effect' of the spell along with the information of whether it's a COMBAT or NON-COMBAT spell.  COMBAT spells can only be cast in combat while NON-COMBAT spells can only be cast when there are no monsters, or there are peaced monsters in the area.  Below is an example of the \i Firebolt\plain\fs20  Fire Spell information:
\par \fs24 
\par \pard\li175 \i\fs20 COMBAT Spell, will cause 4 Monsters in 2 Groups to be Fried.\plain\fs24 
\par \pard\li175\tx-5 
\par \fs20 This line tells you that it's a combat spell, and how many monsters it will affect if it works.  The above spell will affect a maximum of 4 monsters in a total of 4 groups.  This means that if the spell was cast on group #1 of 12 monsters, it could potentially kill up to 4 monsters from that group before moving on to group #2 (which is the next monster group if it exists).
\par 
\par After the general spell information is a brief description for the spell so the caster has a better idea of exactly what it does and where the spell came from.\fs24 
\par \pard\tx-5 
\par \pard \b\cf1 Spell Classes
\par \plain\fs20 Spells are broken down into "spell classes\'94 that specify the nature of the spell.  Below is a list of the spell classes, a brief description of the class origins, and the spells available within the class.
\par \fs24 
\par \pard\tx-5 \fs20 Below is a list of available classes.  You can either use the browse button to page through the spell classes and associated spells, or click on the desired class.\fs24 
\par \pard \fs20 
\par \uldb Fire\plain\fs20 \tab \tab \tab \uldb Heal\plain\fs20 
\par \uldb Cold\plain\fs20 \tab \tab \tab \uldb Movement\plain\fs20 
\par \uldb Electrical\plain\fs20 \tab \tab \uldb Banish\plain\fs20 
\par \uldb Mind\plain\fs20 \tab \tab \tab \uldb Resistant\plain\fs20 
\par \uldb Damage\plain\fs20 \tab \tab \uldb Visual\plain\fs20 
\par \uldb Element\plain\fs20 \tab \tab \uldb Magical\plain\fs20 
\par \uldb Kill\plain\fs20 \tab \tab \tab \uldb Location\plain\fs20 
\par \uldb Charm\plain\fs20 \tab \tab \tab \uldb Protection\plain\fs20 
\par \uldb Bind\plain\fs20 
\par 
\par Keep in mind that you will have to experiment with the spells to figure out exactly what they do.  Some spells will not be very effective when you are first able to cast them, but will improve as your character becomes more powerful (gains levels).
\par \pard 
\par \i\cf2 Move to the next section to read about Fire Spells.
\par Move to the previous section to read about The Library.
\par \page
{\up +}
{\up $}
{\up #}
\pard\keepn \plain\b\fs28 Spells: Healer\plain\fs24 
\par \pard 
\par \pard\tx2435\tx5785 \i\b Spells usable by members of the Healer's guild.\plain\fs24 
\par \pard\tx2875\tx3305 \b\fs20 Spell\tab Level\plain\fs24 
\par \pard\tx2905\tx3805 \fs20 Set Sanctuary\tab 1
\par Cause Wounds\tab 2
\par Minor Heal\tab 2
\par Poison\tab 2
\par Cure Poison\tab 3
\par Dispel Undead\tab 3
\par Heal\tab 4
\par Dispel Elemental\tab 4
\par Cause Heavy Wounds\tab 4
\par Cure Paralysis\tab 4
\par Leprosy\tab 4
\par Cure Disease\tab 5
\par Power\tab 5
\par Banish Devil\tab 5
\par Resist Fire\tab 6
\par Resist Draining\tab 6
\par Resist Cold\tab 6
\par Harm\tab 6
\par Banish Demon\tab 6
\par Draining Touch\tab 6
\par Raise Dead\tab 7
\par Restoration\tab 7
\par Cause Fatal Wounds\tab 7
\par Resist Poison\tab 8
\par Resist Disease\tab 8
\par Resist Paralysis\tab 8
\par Resist Stoning\tab 8
\par Abolish Undead\tab 8
\par Cure\tab 8
\par \pard\tx2905\tx3805 Restore Flesh\tab 8
\par Mass Heal\tab 8
\par Resist Magic\tab 10
\par Resurrect\tab 12
\par Word of Death\tab 12\fs24 
\par \pard \fs20 
\par \i\cf2 Move to the next section to see the list of Wizard Spells.
\par Move to the previous section to see the list of Sorcerer Spells.
\par \page
{\up +}
{\up $}
{\up #}
\pard\keepn \plain\b\fs28 Spells: Mage\plain\fs24 
\par \pard 
\par \pard\tx2435\tx5785 \i\b Spells usable by members of the Mage's guild.\tab \plain\fs24 
\par \pard\tx2875\tx3305 \b\fs20 Spell\tab Level
\par \plain\fs20 Sleep\tab 1
\par Set Sanctuary\tab 1
\par Nerve Blank\tab 1
\par Control Insect\tab 1
\par Detect Rock\tab 1
\par Control Animal\tab 2
\par Depth Perception\tab 3
\par Feather Essense\tab 3
\par Dazzle\tab 3
\par Control Elemental\tab 3
\par Control\tab 3
\par Minor Heal\tab 4
\par Sight Veil\tab 4
\par See Invisible\tab 4
\par Light Spray\tab 4
\par Control Humanoid\tab 4
\par Control Undead\tab 5
\par Control Giant\tab 5
\par Flickering Doom\tab 5
\par Ethereal Portal\tab 5
\par Bind Animal\tab 5
\par Soul Search\tab 6
\par Find Direction\tab 6
\par Cure Poison\tab 6
\par Summon Shade\tab 6
\par Control Monster\tab 6
\par Bind Elemental\tab 6
\par \pard\tx2875\tx3305 Bind\tab 6
\par Control Dragon\tab 7
\par Heal\tab 8
\par Cure Paralysis\tab 8
\par Cause Death\tab 8
\par Dominate Demon\tab 8
\par Dominate Devil\tab 8
\par Dominate Humanoid\tab 8
\par Dominate Undead\tab 9
\par Cure Disease\tab 10
\par Piercing Darkness\tab 10
\par Dominate Giant\tab 10
\par Precognative Death\tab 12
\par Soul Entrapment\tab 12
\par Domination\tab 12
\par Retrieve Soul\tab 14
\par Field of Death\tab 14\fs24 
\par \pard \fs20 
\par \i\cf2 Move to the next section to see the list of Sorcerer Spells.
\par Move to the previous section to see the list of Thief Spells.
\par \page
{\up +}
{\up $}
{\up #}
\pard\keepn \plain\b\fs28 Spells: Ninja\plain\fs24 
\par \pard 
\par \pard\tx2435\tx5875 \i\b Spells usable by members of the Ninja's guild.\tab \plain\fs24 
\par \pard\tx2875\tx3305 \b\fs20 Spell\tab Level
\par \plain\fs20 Set Sanctuary\tab 1
\par Charm of Opening\tab 9\fs24 
\par \pard \fs20 
\par \i\cf2 Move to the next section to see the list of Thief Spells.
\par Move to the previous section to see the list of Warrior Spells.
\par \page
{\up +}
{\up $}
{\up #}
\pard\keepn \plain\b\fs28 Spells: Nomad\plain\fs24 
\par \pard 
\par \pard\tx2435\tx5875 \i\b Spells usable by members of the Nomad's guild.\tab \plain\fs24 
\par \pard\tx2875\tx3305 \b\fs20 Spell\tab Level
\par \plain\fs20 Set Sanctuary\tab 1
\par Charm of Opening\tab 12\fs24 
\par \pard \fs20 
\par \i\cf2 Move to the next section to see the list of Warrior Spells.
\par Move to the previous section to see the list of Nomad Spells.
\par \page
{\up +}
{\up $}
{\up #}
\pard\keepn \plain\b\fs28 Spells: Paladin\plain\fs24 
\par \pard 
\par \pard\tx2435\tx5875 \i\b Spells usable by members of the Paladin's guild.\tab \plain\fs24 
\par \pard\tx2875\tx3305 \b\fs20 Spell\tab Level
\par \plain\fs20 Set Sanctuary\tab 1
\par Minor Heal\tab 6
\par Cure Poison\tab 9
\par Heal\tab 12
\par Cure Paralysis\tab 12
\par Cure Disease\tab 15\fs24 
\par \pard \fs20 
\par \i\cf2 Move to the next section to see the list of Villain Spells.
\par Move to the previous section to see the list of Seeker Spells.
\par \page
{\up +}
{\up $}
{\up #}
\pard\keepn \plain\b\fs28 Spells: Scavenger\plain\fs24 
\par \pard 
\par \pard\tx2435\tx6505 \i\b Spells usable by members of the Scavenger's guild.\tab \plain\fs24 
\par \pard\tx2875\tx3305 \b\fs20 Spell\tab Level
\par \plain\fs20 Set Sanctuary\tab 1
\par Charm of Opening\tab 6\fs24 
\par \pard \fs20 
\par \i\cf2 Move to the next section to see the list of Seeker Spells.
\par Move to the previous section to see the list of Wizard Spells.
\par \page
{\up +}
{\up $}
{\up #}
\pard\keepn \plain\b\fs28 Spells: Seeker\plain\fs24 
\par \pard 
\par \pard\tx2435\tx5785 \i\b Spells usable by members of the Seeker's guild.\tab \plain\fs24 
\par \pard\tx2875\tx3305 \b\fs20 Spell\tab Level
\par \plain\fs20 Set Sanctuary\tab 1
\par Detect Rock\tab 1
\par Depth Perception\tab 3
\par Feather Essense\tab 3
\par Ethereal Portal\tab 5
\par Soul Search\tab 6
\par Find Direction\tab 6
\par Sight Veil\tab 6
\par See Invisible\tab 6
\par Displacement\tab 8
\par Mass Levitate\tab 8
\par Resist Fire\tab 9
\par Resist Draining\tab 9
\par Resist Cold\tab 9
\par Resist Poison\tab 12
\par Resist Disease\tab 12
\par Resist Paralysis\tab 12
\par Resist Stoning\tab 12
\par Teleport\tab 12
\par Sanctuary\tab 12
\par Retrieve Soul\tab 14
\par Resist Magic\tab 15\fs24 
\par \pard\tx2875 
\par \pard \i\fs20\cf2 Move to the next section to see the list of Paladin Spells.
\par Move to the previous section to see the list of Scavenger Spells.
\par \page
{\up +}
{\up $}
{\up #}
\pard\keepn \plain\b\fs28 Spells: Sorcerer\plain\fs24 
\par \pard 
\par \pard\tx2435\tx5785 \i\b Spells usable by members of the Sorcerer's guild.\tab \plain\fs24 
\par \pard\tx2875\tx3305 \b\fs20 Spell\tab Level
\par \plain\fs20 Set Sanctuary\tab 1
\par Shock\tab 1
\par Poison\tab 2
\par Sight Veil\tab 2
\par See Invisible\tab 2
\par Firebolt\tab 2
\par Cold Blast\tab 2
\par Protection\tab 3
\par Resist Fire\tab 3
\par Resist Draining\tab 3
\par Resist Cold\tab 3
\par Lightning Bolt\tab 3
\par Resist Poison\tab 4
\par Resist Disease\tab 4
\par Resist Paralysis\tab 4
\par Blue Flame\tab 4
\par Resist Stoning\tab 4
\par Leprosy\tab 4
\par Resist Magic\tab 5
\par Ice Spray\tab 5
\par Flamesheet\tab 5
\par ThunderBolt\tab 6
\par Mental Resistance\tab 6
\par Electrical Resistance\tab 6
\par Resist Acidity\tab 6
\par Acidic Spray\tab 6
\par Static Mesh\tab 7
\par Pillar of Fire\tab 7
\par \pard\tx2875\tx3305 Hail Storm\tab 8
\par Flesh to Stone\tab 8
\par Mass Sight Veil\tab 8
\par Mass Protection\tab 8
\par Sphere of Flames\tab 10
\par Paralyzing Death\tab 10
\par Burning Air\tab 11
\par Electric Field\tab 11
\par Arctic Storm\tab 12\fs24 
\par \pard\tx2875 
\par \pard \i\fs20\cf2 Move to the next section to see the list of Healer Spells.
\par Move to the previous section to see the list of Mage Spells.
\par \page
{\up +}
{\up $}
{\up #}
\pard\keepn \plain\b\fs28 Spells: Thief\plain\fs24 
\par \pard 
\par \pard\tx2435\tx5875 \i\b Spells usable by members of the Thief's guild.\tab \plain\fs24 
\par \pard\tx2435\tx3305 \b\fs20 Spell\tab Level\plain\fs24 
\par \pard\tx2875\tx3305 \fs20 Set Sanctuary\tab 1
\par Charm of Opening\tab 3\fs24 
\par \pard \fs20 
\par \i\cf2 Move to the next section to see the list of Mage Spells.
\par Move to the previous section to see the list of Ninja Spells.
\par \page
{\up +}
{\up $}
{\up #}
\pard\keepn \plain\b\fs28 Spells: Villain\plain\fs24 
\par \pard 
\par \pard\tx2435\tx5875 \i\b Spells usable by members of the Villain's guild.\tab \plain\fs24 
\par \pard\tx2875\tx3305 \b\fs20 Spell\tab Level
\par \plain\fs20 Set Sanctuary\tab 1
\par Minor Heal\tab 6
\par Poison\tab 6
\par Cure Poison\tab 9
\par Heal\tab 12
\par Cure Paralysis\tab 12
\par Leprosy\tab 12\fs24 
\par \pard \fs20 
\par \i\cf2 Move to the next section to read about The Dungeon..
\par Move to the previous section to see the list of Paladin Spells.
\par \page
{\up +}
{\up $}
{\up #}
\pard\keepn \plain\b\fs28 Spells: Warrior\plain\fs24 
\par \pard 
\par \pard\tx2435\tx5875 \i\b Spells usable by members of the Warrior's guild.\tab \plain\fs24 
\par \pard\tx2875\tx3305 \b\fs20 Spell\tab Level
\par \plain\fs20 Set Sanctuary\tab 1\fs24 
\par \pard \fs20 
\par \i\cf2 Move to the next section to see the list of Ninja Spells.
\par Move to the previous section to see the list of Nomad Spells.
\par \page
{\up +}
{\up $}
{\up #}
\pard\keepn \plain\b\fs28 Spells: Wizard\plain\fs24 
\par \pard 
\par \i\b Spells usable by members of the Wizard's guild.\tab \plain\fs24 
\par \pard\tx2875 \b\fs20 Spell\tab Level\plain\fs24 
\par \fs20 Sleep\tab 1
\par Set Sanctuary\tab 1
\par Nerve Blank\tab 1
\par Detect Rock\tab 1
\par Cause Wounds\tab 1
\par Depth Perception\tab 3
\par Feather Essense\tab 3
\par Dazzle\tab 3
\par Cause Heavy Wounds\tab 3
\par Light Spray\tab 4
\par Flickering Doom\tab 5
\par Ethereal Portal\tab 5
\par Soul Search\tab 6
\par Find Direction\tab 6
\par Dispell Undead\tab 6
\par Power\tab 6
\par Summon Shade\tab 6
\par Harm\tab 7
\par Draining Touch\tab 7
\par Sight Veil\tab 8
\par See Invisible\tab 8
\par Dispell Elemental\tab 8
\par Cause Death\tab 8
\par Displacement\tab 8
\par Mass Levitate\tab 8
\par Cause Fatal Wounds\tab 8
\par Resist Fire\tab 9
\par \pard\tx2875 Resist Draining\tab 9
\par Resist Cold\tab 9
\par Banish Devil\tab 10
\par Piercing Darkness\tab 10
\par Resist Poison\tab 12
\par Resist Disease\tab 12
\par Resist Paralysis\tab 12
\par Resist Stoning\tab 12
\par Banish Demon\tab 12
\par Teleport\tab 12
\par Precognative Death\tab 12
\par Sanctuary\tab 12
\par Protection\tab 15
\par Resist Magic\tab 15
\par Word of Death\tab 15
\par Abolish Undead\tab 16
\par Mental Resistance\tab 18
\par Electrical Resistance\tab 18
\par Resist Acidity\tab 18
\par \fs24 
\par \i\fs20\cf2 Move to the next section to see the list of Scavenger Spells.\plain\fs24 
\par \pard \i\fs20\cf2 Move to the previous section to see the list of Healer Spells.
\par \page
{\up $}
{\up #}
\pard\keepn \plain\b\fs28 System Requirements\plain\fs24 
\par \pard 
\par \fs20 Mordor \i\b requires\plain\fs20  the following to run:
\par \fs24 
\par \pard\li355 \fs20 Microsoft Windows 3.x, Workgroups for Windows 3.x, Windows NT, Windows 95 or 100% Compatible Windows Operating System
\par 386/33 or greater processor
\par 4 MB RAM Available to Windows
\par 5 MB of Disk Space
\par 640x480x256 color VGA resolution
\par \fs24 
\par \pard \fs20 Mordor \i recommends\plain\fs20  the following to run:
\par \fs24 
\par \pard\li355 \fs20 Microsoft Windows Operating System
\par 486/33 or greater processor
\par 8 MB RAM Available to Windows with Caching
\par 6.5 MB of Disk Space
\par Sound card capable of playing MIDI and WAVE files
\par 800x600x256 color SVGA resolution
\par \fs24 
\par \pard \fs20 Because of the size and playing style of Mordor, game performance may be improved by closing any other applications that may be running in the background.  Mordor was also written to be played with either Small Fonts System Resource Sizes in 800x600 resolution or Small or Large fonts System Resource Sizes in 1024x768 resolution.  It is not recommended that one play Mordor in 800x600 with Large Fonts.  Mordor is also a 256 color application that \i can\plain\fs20  run in 16 colors in necessary, but the graphic quality will be lacking.
\par \page
{\up +}
{\up $}
{\up #}
\pard\keepn \fs24 
\par \b\fs28 The City\line
\plain\i\fs22\cf3 \'93Let the city be your haven, the store your security, the bank your protection, the guilds your ways, the morgue your commitment to life, and the seer your link to the uncertain.\'94\b \line
\tab - \'93Crashland\'94, Master of the Guilds\plain\fs24 
\par 
\par \pard 
\par \fs20 \{ewl FH_BMP.DLL,FH_BMP,cityw1.bmp\}There are several options available only in the city which will be discussed in the Following Sections.  These options include the Store, the Bank, the Morgue, the Seer, and the Guilds.
\par 
\par Familiarize yourself with the city.  It is your haven.
\par 
\par Upon returning to the city from the dungeon, you will rest and heal yourself (aging in the process).  This process will restore your hits, replenish spell points, and cure any poison or disease.  It will also heal any companions.
\par \pard 
\par \b\cf1 Additional Topics:
\par \uldb \plain\uldb\fs20 Bank\plain\fs20 
\par \uldb Morgue\plain\fs20 
\par \uldb The Seer\plain\fs20 
\par \uldb Store\plain\fs20 
\par \uldb Guilds\plain\fs20 
\par \uldb Holding & Confinement\plain\fs20 
\par 
\par \i\cf2 Move to the next section to read about the City Bank.
\par Move to the previous section to read about the Toolbar.
\par \page
{\up +}
{\up $}
{\up #}
\pard\keepn \plain\b\fs28 The City: Bank\plain\fs24 
\par \pard 
\par \fs20 \{bml bm7.bmp\}The Bank of Mordor is where you may put the gold and items that you do not wish to use (or possibly have stolen) while in the dungeon.  When spending money in the city, gold will be taken from your character and/or your bank account.
\par 
\par To Deposit or Withdraw money from your account, either type in the amount and press Enter or press the "All\'94 button.  
\par 
\par You can also deposit up to 40 items in the Bank by Dragging and Dropping the selected item from your character\'92s Items Window into the Items list located on the right hand side of the Bank Window.  To withdraw an item, simply select the item in the Bank Window\'92s Items list and drag it to your character\'92s items window and drop it in the preferred slot.  You can obtain information on any item in the Bank by selecting the item and then clicking the Info button.
\par \pard 
\par \b\cf1 Party Options\plain\fs24 
\par \pard\li175 \fs20 If you currently have a party put together, you will also be presented with a small set of Party Options, which Includes Pool & Deposit, Party Deposit and Party Pool & Deposit.  Pool & Deposit means that all characters in the party give the gold they are currently carrying to the current character in the bank, and then the current character deposits the pooled money.  Party Deposit means that each character in the party Deposits all of their money into their own bank account.  Party Pool & Deposit means that all characters in the party give all of their money (includes that in the bank) to the current character to deposit.\fs24 
\par \pard \fs20 
\par \i\cf2 Move to the next section to read about The City Morgue.
\par Move to the previous section to read about The City.
\par \page
{\up +}
{\up $}
{\up #}
\pard\keepn\tx-5 \plain\fs24 
\par \b\fs28 The City: Guilds\line
\plain\i\fs22\cf3 \'93Even strength in numbers cannot overcome the advanced teachings of a guild!\'94\line
\tab - \b \'93Bartow\'94, Master of the Warrior\'92s Guild\plain\fs24 
\par 
\par \pard\tx2695 
\par \pard \fs20 \{bml bm8.bmp\} A guild is an organization of teachers and students dedicated to a specific way of life.  When a character joins a guild, they must adhere to the restrictions specified by the guild (while they are currently acting as a member of that guild) in order to advance in the guild.  Restrictions sometimes affect what items a character can use or wear while they are acting as a member of a specified guild (i.e. Mage\'92s guild does not allow its members to use swords).  However, Guilds are not restricted in the way of not allowing their members to join and act as members of other guilds.  Even though a character can only \i act\plain\fs20  as a member of one guild at a time, one can \i be\plain\fs20  a member of more than one guild at a time, causing all abilities, spells, and att/def modifications to be shared throughout all guilds (i.e. an experienced Ninja acting as a new Mage has the fighting abilities they achieved as a Ninja.  However, they may not be able to use the Ninja-specific items while acting as a Mage because of item restrictions set by the Mage\'92s guild).
\par \pard 
\par In order to advance in a guild, a character must be acting as a member of that guild while gaining the experience required to make a level within that guild.  This means that a character can only work on one guild at a time.  The experience that a character gains is always for the current guild - not for others.
\par 
\par Every character is a member of the Nomads guild when they start the game.  A character may join one other guild free of charge (provided they meet the requirements), but thereafter they must pay to join a new guild.  Guilds that cost the most to join usually provide either a high level or a wide range of spells and abilities.  The price may quite often seem hefty, but it\'92s worth it in the end.  Guilds that cost the most to join usually provide either the highest level for select spells & abilities, or the widest range (but not necessarily the highest level) of spells & abilities.  For more information, see the next section, \uldb Guild Statistics\plain\fs20 .
\par \pard 
\par Each guild has a spell book which determines which spells the specific guild has access to.  As a character joins other guilds, their spell book will grow in size, giving access to all the spells they have learned.  If a character joins more than one guild that share the same spell (i.e. Healer and Wizard both have a spell called \'91Power\'92), the most powerful guild that has access to that specific spell will be default.
\par 
\par You may switch between guilds only while in the city.  You may not switch guilds if you are wearing cursed items, or if you are wearing any items aligned opposite to your character.
\par \pard 
\par \cf1 When a character is as a member of a guild, they are usually assigned a special title relating to their level and experience in the guild.  In the Character Statistics Window, this title is displayed instead of the guild name.  Even though the title may be different from the guild name, the character is still acting as a member of that guild.
\par 
\par \plain\fs20 There are a number of options available within the guilds.  You can \'91reacquaint\'92 with a guild if you want to be an active member of that guild again (provided that you are already a member).  When you qualify, you may \'91make level\'92 in a guild.  Making level within a guild requires that you gain a certain amount of experience by killing monsters.  The guild will also require a fee in gold.  
\par \pard 
\par As you achieve higher guild levels, you may gain additional hits (if the guild you are making a level in is the highest guild level of all guilds that you are a member of).  Your attack and defense may also rise.  This is dependent on what "level\'94 of A/D the guild\'92s teachings has put you at compared to the A/D levels of other guilds.  Nomad\'92s gain A/D the quickest, but stop raising a character\'92s A/D much sooner than, say, the Warrior\'92s guild.  For example, if a Character is a Level 30 Nomad and has gained 75/75 A/D from the Guild\'92s teachings and joins the Sorcerers guild, the character\'92s A/D will not raise (from making levels) until the Sorcerer\'92s teachings raise the A/D above that of the Nomad\'92s A/D level of 75/75.
\par \pard 
\par \b\cf1 Quests\plain\fs24 
\par \pard\li175 \fs20 As you gain levels, you may be assigned a \'91quest\'92 of a certain item you must return with or a monster you must slay before you can make the next level.
\par 
\par A quest for a monster is completed the instant the creature is slain.  A quest for an item is completed when the character returns to the guild with the item and makes a level.  The quested item will then be removed from the character\'92s inventory.
\par 
\par If an explorer is assigned a quest that he or she cannot complete, or does not wish to complete, the character can always file for \b forfeit\plain\fs20  of the quest.  This can only be done if the character is pinned and has an outstanding quest to complete.  If a character does forfeit a quest, they will be demoted a certain number of levels (based on their current level), losing all attack, defense, experience, abilities, and other modifications that were gained between the current guild level and the level that the character is demoted to.  Demoted characters are entered into the guilds log as unable to complete their quest.
\par \pard\li175 \fs24 
\par \pard \b\fs20\cf1 The Library\plain\fs24 
\par \pard\li175 \fs20 One can also visit the \uldb Library\plain\fs20  by clicking on the \'91Library\'92 button.  This feature is discussed after the Guilds and Guild Statistics.\fs24 
\par \pard \fs20 
\par \b\cf1 The Guild Log\plain\fs24 
\par \pard\li175 \fs20 One can also read a guild's log by clicking the \'91Read Guild Log\'92 button, which will display a collection of actions and events that have occurred in reference to a guilds members.  Information includes quests, resurrections, discoveries and more.\fs24 
\par \pard \fs20 
\par \b\cf1 Visiting & Joining other Guilds\plain\fs24 
\par \pard\li175 \fs20 A character can also \'91visit\'92 other guilds and attempt to join, if they meet the criteria (and in some cases, have the gold).  One can also get \'91experience information\'92 for the current guild (if the character is a member).
\par 
\par To switch between guilds, select the guild you wish to visit from the List Box and press the Visit button.  When visiting a guild, you then have the options of attempting to Join (provided your stats, race and alignment meet the guilds requirements) or Reacquaint yourself with the Guild.\fs24 
\par \pard 
\par \pard\li175 \b\fs20\cf1 Nomad
\par \plain\fs20 Nomads are very quick learners, even though they do not try to learn many different abilities.  Being good fighters and moderate thieves, Nomads are often found roaming the upper levels of the dungeon.
\par 
\par \b\cf1 Warrior
\par \plain\fs20 Warriors could care less about spells, but are unmatched in brute fighting ability.  Being the quickest to learn how to Critically hit their opponent, they are very good fighters and alone can use the best weapons found in the dungeon.
\par 
\par \b\cf1 Ninja
\par \pard\li175 \plain\fs20 Ninjas are weapons masters and can use almost all weapons including their hands.  Since a Ninja desires quickness, they are very specific about the items they use.  Ninjas are not allowed to wear most types of armor and other items.  However, having access to special weapons that only they can use, Ninjas posses the skills of Critically hitting and Backstabbing their opponents, along with moderate thieving skills.
\par 
\par \b\cf1 Thief
\par \plain\fs20 Thieves are the best at collecting treasure, although the guild makes sure to get a fair share.  Very devoted to stealing, Thieves often lack fighting skill, but make up for it with their treacherous backstabbing.  Thieves also have the best magical ability to open any type of sealed or locked container.
\par \pard\li175 
\par \b\cf1 Mage
\par \plain\fs20 Though they lack the destructive powers of a Sorcerer, Mages makes up for it by having the ability to control powerful monsters to act as companions.  They are also fairly adept at killing monsters with a small blade and curing players, though putting a corpse back together is beyond their abilities.
\par 
\par \b\cf1 Sorcerer
\par \plain\fs20 A Sorcerer lacks the fine mental control and deep concentration of a Mage while in combat, and therefore, their spells tend to blast monsters against the walls instead of charming them.  Outside of combat, a Sorcerer can muster up some useful player protection spells, but lacks access to any types of healing spells.
\par \pard\li175 
\par \b\cf1 Healer
\par \plain\fs20 Healers are very good at putting characters and companions back together again after a rough day in the dungeon.  The best at curing, they are also fairly good at killing monsters with a wide variety of damage spells.  Healers are valued members of any party since they can fix almost any physical problem, including death.
\par 
\par \b\cf1 Wizard
\par \plain\fs20 Wizards are very good at teleporting parties around the dungeon, although they cannot always tell where they are going to land.  They also have damage spells equivalent to a Healer and protection spells on par with a Sorcerer.
\par \pard\li175 
\par \b\cf1 Scavenger
\par \plain\fs20 A Scavenger is a cross between a Warrior and a Thief, fighting a little worse than the former and stealing a little worse than the latter.  A Scavenger can backstab like a Thief, can be other than neutrally aligned, and can use a few more items than a Thief  They are also fairly good at collecting treasure and have access to some of the Thief\'92s magical spells for opening containers.
\par 
\par \b\cf1 Seeker
\par \plain\fs20 Seekers are very good at moving through the dungeon, being able to levitate, locate other characters, and teleport.  They can\'92t directly kill monsters with their magical abilities, but a Seeker does well with a weapon in hand.  They are also the best at mapping the dungeon and detecting any types of \'91anomalies\'92 they may encounter in the depths.
\par \pard\li175 
\par \b\cf1 Paladin
\par \plain\fs20 Paladins think of themselves as the heroes of the dungeon, blundering about killing monsters and somewhat successfully healing themselves.  Possessing good fighting skills and the ability to critically hit their enemies (though not nearly at the level of a Warrior), one doesn\'92t have to be too smart to be a Paladin, they just have to look good doing it.
\par 
\par \b\cf1 Villain
\par \plain\fs20 Villains are fallen Thieves, having strayed from the magical and equipment restrictions of the Thief\'92s guild and gone their own way.  While working on various poisons, the Villains learned or stole some of the secrets of healing.  They also have the ability to Critically hit and Backstab their opponents and aren\'92t bad at collecting treasure.\fs24 
\par \pard \fs20 
\par 
\par Keep in mind that a player can be a member of and have the abilities of more than one of the above guilds at a time by joining multiple guilds.  However, remember that Race and Alignment is very important in determining a character\'92s limitations in joining Guilds since some guilds will not allow certain Races or Alignments to join.  So, if a player wishes to Create a Warrior/Sorcerer/Thief, they should go over the \uldb Race Statistics\plain\fs20  and decide which race would best suit their needs.
\par \pard 
\par A good Starting Combination is a Nomad/Sorcerer or a Nomad/Mage.  The Nomad\'92s guild has pretty good fighting/thieving abilities, and the Sorcerer\'92s/Mage\'92s guilds are good for spells.  It\'92s good to regulate switching between the two guilds to build up their levels (i.e. make 5 Levels in the Nomad\'92s guild then 5 in Sorcerers, then 5 more in the Nomads, etc.).  Keep in mind which guilds give the most hits when making new levels (i.e. the Average hits for a Nomad per level (until Maximum Level (ML) is reached) is 5, vs. the 2 or 3 for Mage, so a character will probably want to gain hit points as a member of the Nomad\'92s guild until Maximum Level (ML) is reached).
\par \pard 
\par Characters with the abilities of Spell Casting, Fighting and Thieving guilds are the most powerful in the game.
\par 
\par \b\cf1 Additional Topics:
\par \uldb \plain\uldb\fs20 Guild Statistics\plain\fs20 
\par 
\par \i\cf2 Move to the next section to see the Guild Statistics.
\par Move to the previous section to read about Items.
\par \page
{\up +}
{\up $}
{\up #}
\pard\keepn \plain\b\fs28 The City: Holding & Confinement\plain\fs24 
\par \pard 
\par \fs20 \{bml bm9.bmp\}Confinement and Holding is where all of the creatures that explorers befriend or bind end up if one grows weary of their companion or becomes short of cash.  It\'92s said that an experienced Mage can actually make a good living charming & binding monsters in the depths and selling them to the Holding & Confinement center.
\par 
\par On the right is the list of creatures that are currently available.  Like the store, the GNE represent the number of the specified creature that are available for the given alignment. To select a future companion, simply click on it (and select the alignment if prompted).  For Information on a creature, click INFO.  To buy them, click BUY.  To search for a creature, simply type in part of or the whole name of the item you are looking for and hit return.
\par \pard To Sell or Identify a companion, Drag and Drop the selected companion picture from your Companions tab (Objects & Spells Window) into the Comp. Text Box in the \i Sell, Identify & Realign Companions\plain\fs20  area.
\par \fs24 
\par \fs20\cf1 Tan-Yellow shaded areas in the window represent fields where you can either type in data or Drag and Drop a companion.  Dark-Gray shaded areas in the window represent fields that just display information.\plain\fs24 
\par \i\fs20 
\par 
\par \plain\b\fs20\cf1 Holding Inventory\plain\fs24 
\par \pard\li175 \fs20 Selling a companion to the store is the only way to get rid of hostile (or bound) companions without taking the chance of them turning on you and attacking.
\par When you sell a companion to the store, it will be added to the inventory list and available for purchase by others.  However, just as the Items store, other adventurers and explorers sometimes seek companions from holding as well.  This can be a disadvantage if the creature they purchase is the last of its type in stock - especially if it\'92s a very useful companion!  The advantage to this is that these individuals also sell the creatures they either bind or befriend on their explorations to the holding center as well.  Because of this, it\'92s recommended that one check Holding & Confinement for any new inventory every once and awhile - you never know what you\'92ll find!\fs24 
\par \pard \fs20 
\par 
\par \b Available options within Holding & Confinement are as follows:
\par 
\par \cf1 Buying Companions\plain\fs24 
\par \pard\li175 \fs20 You can make a purchase by clicking on the desired creature in the list of available companions (and selecting the alignment if prompted) then pressing the BUY button.  \fs24 
\par \pard\li175\fi175 \fs20 When a companion is Bought, it will be bound to a certain level, but depending on the power (guild levels) of the character, further binding may be required.
\par Buying companions can be very advantageous for starting characters, because it quite often gives the nasty monsters in the dungeon another target to hit.\fs24 
\par \pard \fs20 
\par \b\cf1 Selling Companions\plain\fs24 
\par \pard\li175 \fs20 You can Sell companions you have in your possession by either typing the number of the companion into the Sell Comp. field and pressing Return, or Dragging & Dropping the desired companion picture in the Sell Comp. Field, then clicking the SELL button.  This \'91section\'92 also allows you to identify and realign companions (described below).\fs24 
\par \pard\li175\fi175 \fs20 Any companion you sell to the holding center will be available for purchase, but usually at a much higher price than you sold it for.
\par \fs24 
\par \pard \b\fs20\cf1 Learning about a Companion\plain\fs24 
\par \pard\li175 \fs20 To learn about a companion and their abilities, select/drag it in the \'91Sell & Identify Companion\'92 area and click the ID button. This gives you different information depending upon your current knowledge of the creature, which is based on your character\'92s Intelligence, Wisdom and Guild Level.  How much you know about a creature initially is determined by your intelligence and wisdom.  You will be able to identify some creatures when you encounter them, but most others will usually require the use of the Holding & Confinement Centers identification services to obtain all information.
\par \pard\li175 
\par When you bring up the Information on a companion in the Stats Window Misc Tab, the information displayed will be dependent on your current knowledge of the creature.  For more information on companions, please see the \uldb Companions\plain\fs20  Section in this Helplesson\fs24 
\par \pard \fs20 
\par \b\cf1 Realign a Companion\plain\fs24 
\par \pard\li175 \fs20 This allows you to change the alignment of a companion.  This is a very tedious process that is both very expensive and risky - especially for companions who are realigned opposite to their original alignment, which can result in the death of the companion.  To realign a companion, simply select/drag it in the \'91Sell & Identify Item\'92 area and click one of the three \'91GNE\'92 buttons.\fs24 
\par \pard \fs20 
\par \b\cf1 Bind a Companion\plain\fs24 
\par \pard\li175 \fs20 Once a character has purchased a companion or charmed/bound them in the dungeon, it becomes necessary either sooner or later to reinforce the bind level of a companion.  A Mage has access to specific spells that are built for this, but other characters are not so fortunate (unless they find items capable of this).  For this reason, the Holding and Confinement center offers the services of their bindsmen, who have the ability to re-bind a companion so that they do not break away from their masters (or at least make it harder).
\par \pard\li175 Though very useful, re-binding a companion can quite often be very costly, but can be worth it if the companion is helpful enough to the character.
\par 
\par Companions that joined a character free of will cannot be re-bound.
\par \fs24 
\par \pard \fs20\cf2 With all options in the city, gold will be removed from your bank account if you do not have enough on your character, but do in your account.
\par 
\par \i Move to the next section to read about Items.
\par Move to the previous section to read about the City Store.
\par \page
{\up +}
{\up $}
{\up #}
\pard\keepn \plain\b\fs28 The City: Morgue\plain\fs24 
\par \pard 
\par \fs20 \{bml bm10.bmp\}At the Morgue, you may raise characters or companions from the dead.  A fairly large sum of money is often required for any type of work.  The advantage to using the morgue is that the workers are very efficient (increasing the % of a successful raise) and convenient.  However, the main disadvantage is the fact that one point of constitution is quite often removed from the character being raised.\line
\line
Keep in mind that one can also raise characters and companions with spells!  For more information, see the section on \uldb Dying\plain\fs20 .
\par \pard 
\par 
\par The only type of death the morgue cannot deal with is a character who has been fused with Rock.
\par 
\par In the morgue, you also have the option of hiring "Rescuers\'94 to go down and try to bring up a dead character.  Their success depends on how deep the rescuers must go and the given coordinates of the dead character.  Also, a large sum of money is always involved whether or not the rescuers succeed.
\par 
\par To execute an option, click on the appropriate button and follow the given directions.
\par \pard 
\par \i\cf2 Move to the next section to read about the City Seer.
\par Move to the previous section to read about the City Bank.
\par \page
{\up +}
{\up $}
{\up #}
\pard\keepn \plain\b\fs28 The City: Seer\plain\fs24 
\par \pard 
\par \fs20 \{bml bm11.bmp\}The Seer of Mordor has the ability to locate other characters, monsters and items that are in the depths of the dungeon.  
\par 
\par Characters are easiest for the Seer because he knows what types of energy to look for, often allowing him to tell you exactly where they are.  If a character is close, the Seer usually has no problems,  however, when the character is deep in the dungeon, sometimes it takes the Seer many tries and lots of gold before he can get an exact fix on the character.
\par \pard 
\par The next most useful ability of the Seer is that of locating Monsters and Items.  This information is very useful to characters with a quest they must fulfill to advance in their guild. When the Seer is looking for a monster or item, he needs to know what it is called. Once given the proper name, he can often locate a general area of the dungeon where a creature may reside, or a general creature type that may carry the item of the quest.
\par 
\par Even though the Seer doesn\'92t charge nearly as much as the Morgue Rescuers do, the total cost can add up when attempting to locate a character, monster, or item deep in the dungeon.
\par \pard 
\par To execute an option, click on the appropriate button and follow the given directions.
\par 
\par \i\cf2 Move to the next section to read about the City Store.
\par Move to the previous section to read about the City Morgue.
\par \page
{\up +}
{\up $}
{\up #}
\pard\keepn \plain\b\fs28 The City: Store\plain\fs24 
\par \pard 
\par \fs20 \{bml bm12.bmp\}The Store is the largest service available in the city.  It is where a character can buy, sell, identify, realign, combine, and uncurse items.
\par \fs24 
\par \pard\tx355 \fs20 On the right is the list of items currently available.  The UGNE represents the number of the specified items that are available for the given alignment (U for unaligned).  Items that can only be bought in the store (and not found in the dungeon) are displayed with a fixed price (i.e. 350 Gold for a Bronze Sword).  Items that are displayed in \b bold\plain\fs20  are items that your character can currently use.  Items not in bold cannot be used by your character (i.e. Guild, Level, Stat Restrictions).  To select an item, simply click on it (and select the alignment if prompted).  For Information on an item, click INFO.  To buy it, click BUY.  To search for an item, simply type in part of or the whole name of the item you are looking for and hit return.\fs24 
\par \pard \fs20 To Sell or Identify an Item, Drag and Drop the selected item from your Items Window into the Item Text Box in the \i Sell, Identify & Realign Items\plain\fs20  area.\fs24 
\par 
\par \fs20\cf1 Tan-Yellow shaded areas in the Store Window represent fields where you can either type in data or Drag and Drop an item.  Dark-Gray shaded areas in the Store Window represent fields that just display information.\plain\fs24 
\par \i\fs20 
\par 
\par \plain\b\fs20\cf1 Store Inventory\plain\fs24 
\par \pard\li175 \fs20 When you sell an item to the store, it will be added to the inventory list and available for purchase by others.  However, other adventurers and explorers (the Morgue rescuers need items, too!) may sometimes buy items from the store as well.  This can be a disadvantage if the item they purchase is the last of it\'92s type in stock - especially if it's an item that your characters can use.  The advantage to this is that these individuals also sell the items they find on their explorations to the store as well.  Because of this, it\'92s recommended that one check the store for any new inventory every once and awhile - you never know what you\'92ll find!\fs24 
\par \pard \fs20 
\par 
\par \b Available options within the store are as follows:
\par 
\par \cf1 Buying Items\plain\fs24 
\par \pard\li175 \fs20 You can make a purchase by clicking on the desired item in the list of available items (and selecting the alignment if prompted) then pressing the BUY button.  \fs24 
\par \pard\li175\fi175 \fs20 You should buy and equip your character with a weapon and whatever protection (armor, cloak) you can afford and use from the store.  \i Standard attire for a beginning Nomad is a Sword, Armor, Gloves, Boots, Cloak, Shield and Cap.\plain\fs24 
\par \pard \i\fs20 
\par \plain\b\fs20\cf1 Selling Items\plain\fs24 
\par \pard\li175 \fs20 You can Sell items you have in your possession by either typing the number of the item into the Sell Item field and pressing Return, or Dragging & Dropping the desired item in the Sell Item Field, then clicking the SELL button.  This \'91section\'92 also allows you to identify and realign items (described below).\fs24 
\par \pard\li175\fi175 \fs20 Any item you sell to the store will be available for purchase, but usually at a much higher price than you sold it for.  Sometimes, when you sell an item with "charges\'94 (i.e. Potion of Healing [2]), the item won\'92t appear in the store.  This is because the item had too few available "charges\'94 to put it back on the shelf.  Also, when you sell an item that has many charges (i.e. Potion of Health [23]), you will notice a \'9123->20\'92 next to the sell value.  This means the store will buy charges from you in "chunks\'94 of three (for the above example) for the specified price.  When you sell a "chunk\'94, one of that item type then becomes available for purchasing in the store.\fs24 
\par \pard\li175 \fs20\cf2 This section of the store supports direct Drag and Drop from your Items Window.\plain\fs24 
\par \pard 
\par \b\fs20\cf1 Learning about an item\plain\fs24 
\par \pard\li175 \fs20 To learn about an item, simply select/drag it into the \'91Sell & Identify Item\'92 area and click the ID button. This gives you different information depending upon your current knowledge of the item, which is based on your character\'92s Intelligence, Wisdom and Guild Level.  How much you know about an item is determined initially by your intelligence and wisdom.  You will be able to identify some items when you find them and most others will require a fee to learn more.
\par 
\par When you bring up the Information on an item in the Stats Window Misc Tab, the stats displayed will be dependent on your current knowledge of an item.  For a complete overview of the Item Information Window, please see the \uldb Game Screen\plain\fs20  Section in this Helplesson\fs24 
\par \pard \fs20 
\par \b\cf1 Combine\plain\fs24 
\par \pard\li175 \fs20 Allows you to combine items that have charges.  For example, you can combine two Potions of Health into one Potion of Health with the sum of the charges on the two different potions.  To combine items, simply drag (or type) the items to the Item section (which will add the item to the Items list so you can see what you're combining) and click COMBINE.  If the items are of like type (e.g. 2 Potions of Health) and can be combined, the first item you selected will now hold the sum of all the other items charges!  Items like Swords, Armor, etc. cannot be combined.
\par \pard\li175 \cf2 This section of the store supports direct Drag and Drop from your Items Window.\plain\fs24 
\par \pard \fs20\cf2 
\par \b\cf1 Uncurse an item\plain\fs24 
\par \pard\li175 \fs20 This is the only way to remove a curse from an item, which usually requires a substantial fee.  A "cursed\'94 item is either an item that is of opposite alignment to your character (i.e. Iron Sword (e) equipped by a Good character), or an item that\'92s outrightly cursed (i.e. \i Gloves of the Blackguard\plain\fs20 ).  The only good thing about getting an item uncursed is that the store clerk will completely identify the item before removing it.
\par \cf2 This section of the store supports direct Drag and Drop from your Items Window.\plain\fs24 
\par \pard \fs20\cf2 
\par \b\cf1 Realign an item\plain\fs24 
\par \pard\li175 \fs20 This allows you to change the alignment of certain items.  It provides an alternative to trading with other characters, but can be expensive.  To realign an item, simply select/drag it in the \'91Sell & Identify Item\'92 area and click one of the three \'91GNE\'92 buttons.\fs24 
\par \pard \fs20 
\par \b\cf1 Recharging Items\plain\fs24 
\par \pard\li175 \fs20 You can recharge items that cast spells (i.e. Swords, Artifacts) by selling them to the store and buying them back (the recharging fee being the difference in sell vs. cost price).  You cannot recharge items such as Potions, Scrolls, etc.  This means if you sell a Potion of Healing [1] to the store (where it normally comes with 3 charges), it will not appear in the store's inventory because there wasn't enough left of the potion to create a whole one.  However, if you sell items such as Swords & Artifacts with [0] charges, they will be completely recharged and available for repurchasing.\fs24 
\par \pard \fs20 
\par \cf2 With all options in the city, gold will be removed from your bank account if you do not have enough on your character\'92s person, but do in your account.
\par 
\par \i Move to the next section to read about Holding & Confinement.
\par Move to the previous section to read about the City Morgue.
\par \page
{\up +}
{\up $}
{\up #}
\pard\keepn \plain\fs24 
\par \b\fs28 \{ewl FH_BMP.DLL,FH_BMP,gargoyle.bmp\}The Dungeon\line
\line
\plain\i\fs22\cf3 \'93Let he who ventures into the mines know that without skills, death is certain, and with skills, riches are vast and never-ending -  \line
but death will still hover over you.\'94\b \line
\tab - \'93Maxx\'94, Master of the Villain\'92s Guild\plain\fs24 
\par 
\par \pard 
\par \fs20 Haven of monsters, treasure, and the unknown, the old Mines are usually made up of rooms and corridors.  As a character walks through a door into a new room (or "territory\'94), they will often encounter a group of monsters - unless you or somebody else has recently been through and has already killed them.  The dungeon will repopulate over a time, so a room that was empty on the way down might have monsters in it on your way up...
\par 
\par \{ewl FH_BMP.DLL,FH_BMP,dmainw1.bmp\}
\par \pard 
\par In the above picture, you can see a group of monsters with a treasure chest currently engaged in combat.
\par 
\par The box above the Maze that reads '7,4,1 North [1]' contains the character's current location (x,y,level), direction, and the number of characters in the room (in brackets).. If there are ever dead characters in the room, a number will appear (representing the number of dead characters in the room) with a \'91+\'92 in front of it in the same location (e.g. [1+1]).  If you ever stumble over a dead body and don\'92t know who it is, simply use the \'91look in room\'92 command (see \uldb Commands\plain\fs20  for more information).  If your character (or party) ever becomes lost, you may lose the x,y,lev and direction information until your character (or party) finds out where they are.
\par \pard 
\par The arrow keys underneath the maze represent Left, Forward, Right and Turn Around for movement.  Along the bottom of the window are other command buttons.  These commands are the same as hitting the associated key (i.e. the Fight command is the same as hitting \'91f\'92 during combat).  The number keys represent an item/spell buffer.  Clicking on one of these numbers will activate the associated buffer.  You may use either the keyboard or this command window to carry out any dungeon commands.  For commands that are not available in the command window, use the associated key.
\par \pard 
\par For an overview of Game and Dungeon Commands, please see \uldb Commands\plain\fs20  at the end of this Helplesson
\par \fs24 
\par \b\fs20\cf1 Knowing the Dungeon\plain\fs24 
\par \fs20 There are several neat features and nasty traps that you can encounter in the dungeon.  Below is a known list of them:
\par \fs24 
\par \pard\li175 \fs20\cf1 Stairs
\par \plain\fs20 Go either up or down (surprise!).  Be aware that the deeper you go, the tougher the monsters.
\par 
\par \cf1 Teleporter
\par \plain\fs20 These can either take you to a specific place (only way to find out is to take them more than once) on the same level or on another level; or they can take you to a random place on the same level.  Unlike the teleport spell, teleporters will not cause you to land in rock.  If a party of characters runs into a random teleporter, each character in the party will be teleported to a different location on the same level.
\par \pard\li175 
\par \cf1 Pits
\par \plain\fs20 You will take hits if you fall into them.  Pits become more dangerous as you go deeper into the dungeon.  Levitation will allow you to hover over a pit, although levitation has a small chance of failing.
\par 
\par \cf1 Chute
\par \plain\fs20 Basically like a pit except that you will be on a different level below you if you fall down it.  You cannot crawl back up a chute.  Unless you are levitating, you will take damage when you fall down a chute.  If a character is levitating, they have the option of using the chute just like taking the stairs.
\par \pard\li175 
\par \cf1 Fog/Darkness
\par \plain\fs20 Prevents you from seeing the maze.  You must \'91feel\'92 your way around.  Sometimes the Fog/Darkness will be so thick that it might be hard for you to identify monsters within it.  Intelligence and Wisdom help.
\par 
\par \cf1 Rock
\par \plain\fs20 A square that is solid rock.  The only way to enter a square that is solid rock is with a teleport or portal spell, and if you do so, you will die.  To get out, you must be summoned out of rock by another character with a spell.
\par \pard\li175 
\par \cf1 Rotator
\par \plain\fs20 Will turn you in a random direction and cause you to become disoriented, and sometimes lost as well.  There are also squares that will face you in a predetermined direction all the time.
\par 
\par \cf1 Water
\par \plain\fs20 Water will cause you to drown if you are wearing heavy items and are not levitating.  Certain types of monsters will appear only in water.
\par 
\par \cf1 Anti-Magic
\par \plain\fs20 Will not allow the character to cast spells.  Other spells already cast (i.e. Resist Magic) will stay intact.
\par \pard\li175 
\par \cf1 Quicksand
\par \plain\fs20 This stuff is bad news.  You take hits and can lose items if you are not levitating.
\par 
\par \cf1 Extinguish
\par \plain\fs20 These squares will have the same effect as Anti-Magic and will take away any spells cast on your character (e.g. Resist Magic).\fs24 
\par \pard 
\par \pard\li175 \fs20\cf1 Stud
\par \plain\fs20 In general, these squares will contain tougher monsters, usually from one level deeper than the current level.\fs24 
\par \pard \fs20 
\par There are also some squares that are a combination of the squares that were previously described.
\par 
\par To take either Stairs, or a Chute (only when levitating), select the Take option (by either pressing \'91t\'92 or clicking on the Take command in the Main Dungeon Window).
\par 
\par Some rooms will quite often contain tougher or easier monsters.  Learn to recognize these rooms; your character\'92s life may depend on it.
\par 
\par Characters with a high perception ability are usually able to detect a difference in the maze when walking around.  If the character is high enough level and has a good enough perception ability, they may even be able to completely identify the square they are standing on.
\par \pard 
\par Rumor also has it that secret doors exist within the dungeon.  One can check a wall for a secret door by attempting to pass through it.  If a secret door is there, the character will be allowed through the wall.
\par 
\par In general, the dungeon becomes nastier as you go deeper.  If you get teleported and can\'92t find where you are, remain cool, grab some graph paper and start mapping away until you find yourself and the AutoMap kicks back in.
\par 
\par \i\cf2 Move to the next section to read about the AutoMap.
\par \pard Move to the previous section to see Spells for the Villain.
\par \page
{\up +}
{\up $}
{\up #}
\pard\keepn \plain\b\fs28 The Game Screen\plain\fs24 
\par \pard 
\par \fs20 When you start (run your character), you will find a number of windows displayed on your screen.  Feel free to arrange and size (for character windows) them any way you like - their positions and size will be saved when you exit.  To reset a resized window, simply use the Control Panel (F10).  Below is a picture of each main window followed by a brief description.
\par 
\par \b\cf5 NOTE: All of the windows (except for the City Services windows) in Mordor can be proportionally resized by dragging the window border.  To resize the City Services windows, you must use the Window functions located in the Control Panel.
\par \pard \plain\fs24 
\par \b\fs20\cf1 Tabbed Windows\plain\fs24 
\par \pard\li175 \fs20 In order to make the interface and display of Mordor easier, the two main windows of the game are Tabbed windows.  These two windows are the Character Window (captioned with the current character\'92s name) and the Spells & Objects Window.  The pages (or tabs) on these two windows can be changed by selecting a tab representing the page that you wish to view.  Below is a description of these windows and pages.
\par 
\par \fs24 
\par \pard \b\fs20\cf1 Character (stats) Window\plain\fs24 
\par \pard\li175 \b\fs20\cf1 
\par \{bmc bm13.bmp\}\plain\fs24 
\par \fs20 
\par The Character Window is where all of the character and statistical information can be found.  Below is a description of the separate tabs:
\par 
\par \b Stats (Main Character Information)
\par \plain\fs20 This tab is used to display your character\'92s Name, Guild Title and all other important statistics, including special modifiers (e.g. invisible, levitating, poisoned).
\par 
\par \b Resist. (Resistances)
\par \plain\fs20 This query will list all resistances and the current resistance level (either '-' for none, or the resistance percentage) for the selected character.
\par \pard\li175 
\par \b Char (Character Statistics)
\par \plain\fs20 A general collection of your current character\'92s information.  Includes total monsters killed, how many times the character has died (and has been raised with complications), the natural and modified (by items) stats of the character, and more.
\par 
\par \b Guild (Guild Information)
\par \plain\fs20 This query will display all of the \b guilds\plain\fs20  the character is a member of, the \b level\plain\fs20  of each guild, and a list of the \b abilities\plain\fs20  that the character has, along with a \b rating\plain\fs20  (between 1 and 100) and which \b guild\plain\fs20  the ability comes from.
\par \pard\li175 The \b Ability rating\plain\fs20  is based on the maximum level of that particular ability available in the game.  For example, the Warrior\'92s guild is the only guild that can reach a Fighting Ability rating of 100 since they have a higher fighting ability.  And since the Warrior\'92s guild can reach the highest ability, their highest ability is what your current ability will be rated on.  This means that no other guild can give a character a Fighting Ability of 100.
\par 
\par \b Look (Area Look)
\par \pard\li175 \plain\fs20 The Area List will display the characters that are in the same room as the current character.  This is useful for finding out who is in a room if you\'92ve stumbled over somebody but don\'92t know who.
\par 
\par \b Buffers (Spell/Item Buffers)
\par \plain\fs20 Contains your spell and item buffer information.  Your character has the ability to move (Drag and Drop) spells and items into the slots, which then allows your character to use the item or cast the spell in the selected slot by hitting Shift-Number Key on the keyboard, clicking on the slot itself, or pressing the associated number button in the dungeon window.  Very useful for combat.
\par \pard\li175 
\par \b Misc (Item, Spell or Companion Info)
\par \plain\fs20 The Miscellaneous Tab is used to display either Item, Spell or Companion Information.
\par \fs24 
\par \i\fs20\cf1 Item Information\plain\fs24 
\par \pard\li355 \fs20 Depending on the ID (Identification) Level of an item, the information displayed includes the following:
\par The \b Name\plain\fs20 , \b Class\plain\fs20  and \b A/D\plain\fs20  an item has to offer (when equipped).  If an item is a weapon, a number in brackets will appear after the A/D that shows the \'91power\'92 of the item (how hard it can hit - higher numbers are better).  Information also includes how many swings an item has (if any) and how many hands the item requires to equip.
\par If an item casts a \b Spell\plain\fs20  and is completely identified, you will be informed of what the spell is.  You will also be told whether or not the item casts a spell at a specific \'91spell level\'92 or the level of the caster.  Items that cast spells at a specific level always cast the spell at the same level of power while items that cast spells based on the characters spell level cast spells in magnitude of the characters spell level.
\par \pard\li355 If an item is completely identified, you will also be informed of it\'92s \b Abilities\plain\fs20  (i.e. Resist Fire, or Levitate).  These abilities are only in effect when the item is Equipped.
\par \b SR\plain\fs20  and \b SM\plain\fs20  represent "Stats Required\'94 and "Stats Modified\'94.  The numbers that follow SR represent the stats that are required to use or equip the item (in the following order - Str, Int, Wis, Con, Cha, Dex).  The numbers in SM represent the amount by which a stat will be raised or lowered when the item is equipped or used.
\par \pard\li355 An item is either \b Class Restricted\plain\fs20  or \b Not Class Restricted\plain\fs20 .  Class Restricted items mean that you must currently be a member of a guild that is allowed to use the item.  Not Class Restricted means that your current guild does not need to be able to use an item, but you must be a member of a guild that can use the item.  \b Guilds\plain\fs20  that are allowed to use an item are listed along with what \b level\plain\fs20  (in that particular guild) one has to be to use (or equip) the item.  For more information, see the \uldb Items\plain\fs20  section.
\par \pard\li355 \b ID Level\plain\fs20  represents how much you know about the item.  The ID Level determines how much you know about an item.  If you do not know very much, most of the above information will not be available.\fs24 
\par \pard\li175 
\par \i\fs20\cf1 Spell Information\plain\fs24 
\par \pard\li355 \fs20 General Spell Information includes the \b Name\plain\fs20  and \b Class\plain\fs20  of the Spell.  The \b Guild\plain\fs20  (based on the most powerful guild you are a member of that teaches the spell) and spell \b points\plain\fs20  required to cast the spell.  Any \b special\plain\fs20  information (i.e. how many groups & monsters the spell affects if it\'92s a combat spell) and the \b Stats Required\plain\fs20  to cast the spell.  You will also be told if the spell is a \'91\b mass\'92\plain\fs20  spell (i.e. affects the entire party).
\par \pard\li355 
\par \b Spell Power\plain\fs24 
\par \fs20 With Damage and Heal spells, you will also see two numbers after either "Damage:\'94 or "Heal:\'94 (for example, \'9115/5\'92).  These numbers represent the <base>/<levelmodifier> of the given spell.  For more information, see the \uldb Spells\plain\fs20  section of the Helplesson
\par 
\par \b Bold\plain\fs20  spells indicate that your character has the stats to cast the spells.  \i Non-Bold\plain\fs20  spells indicate that your character is lacking in one or more stats required to cast the spell.
\par \pard\li355 \fs24 
\par \pard\li175 \i\fs20\cf1 Companion Information\plain\fs24 
\par \pard\li355 \fs20 Depending on the ID Level of the character (based on Intelligence, Wisdom and Guild Level), the information displayed includes the following:
\par The \b Name\plain\fs20 , \b Alignment\plain\fs20  and \b A/D\plain\fs20  of the companion.  Also showed are the \b Stats\plain\fs20  (in the same order as the Item Information stats), the \b ID Level\plain\fs20  and \b Special Abilities\plain\fs20  (if any) of the monster (i.e. Fire Resistant, Can Stone, etc.).
\par 
\par A character will also be told the level of \'91contentment\'92 or \'91binding\'92 of the current companion (based on whether or not the companion joined free of will or was bound/charmed).  Discontent companions (companions who have joined free of will) are likely to leave if they become too discontent while bound companions are likely to turn on their master.\fs24 
\par \pard\li175 \fs20 
\par \fs24 
\par \pard \b\fs20\cf1 Objects & Spells Window\plain\fs24 
\par \pard\li175 \b\fs20\cf1 
\par \{bmc bm14.bmp\}\plain\fs24 
\par \fs20 
\par \b Items
\par \uldb \plain\uldb\fs20 Items\plain\fs20  window.  From here, you can \b Equip\plain\fs20 , \b Use\plain\fs20 , \b Drop\plain\fs20  and Examine items.  You can also \b swap\plain\fs20  items and move items to the Store, Bank and the Buffer Window by using Drag and Drop.  To select an item to Equip, Use or Drop, click on the item and then on the associated button.  The currently selected item will be highlighted blue.  When you select \'91Equip\'92, the next item slot will automatically be highlighted (selected).  As a shortcut (nice when in combat), you can use an item by double-clicking on it.
\par \pard\li175 
\par \b Spells
\par \plain\fs20 Your \uldb Spells\plain\fs20  window. From here, you can look up spells and cast them.  You can also get information about a spell as well.  This window also supports Drag and Drop to the Buffer Window.  When you click on a spell, it will be highlighted blue and selected to cast.  To cast a spell that has been typed in or selected, click on the Cast button or hit Enter while in the \'91Spell Name\'92 text box.  To get information on a spell, click on the selected spell (or type it in) and click on the Info button.  For frequently used spells, it\'92s recommend that one uses a Buffer.
\par \pard\li175 
\par \b Companions
\par \plain\fs20 Your Companion\'92s information window, containing the type of creature for a companion along with their hits.  The buttons allow you to kick out a specific companion whenever you wish and even turn and attack them.  When you pick up a dead companion or character, their number (for companions) or name (for characters) will be displayed above the box containing the companion information.  You can also Name your companions and get information on a companions Special Abilities.  For more information, see the \uldb Companions\plain\fs20  section.
\par \pard\li175 
\par \fs24 
\par \pard \b\fs20\cf1 Messages Window\plain\fs24 
\par \pard\li175 \b\fs20\cf1 \{bml bm15.bmp\}\plain\fs20  All important messages for your character or others in your party will be displayed here.  When you cast a spell on yourself or another, or find an item, it will be displayed here.  Experience required for your guild will also be displayed here.
\par 
\par You can clear the message window by double-clicking on the list box.
\par 
\par \fs24 
\par \pard \b\fs20\cf1 Party Window\plain\fs24 
\par \pard\li175 \b\fs20\cf1 \{bmc bm5.bmp\}\plain\fs20  Even when only one character is loaded, the party window is still displayed.  The reason for this is so that the player can see the character\'92s current hits, status, etc, if the Stats Window is tabbed to a page other than the character stats page.  For more information on using this window, see the \uldb Parties\plain\fs20  section.
\par 
\par \fs24 
\par \pard \fs20 When you are in different locations (I.E. the \uldb City\plain\fs20  or the \uldb Dungeon\plain\fs20 ), other windows will be available.  They will be discussed and described later in this Helplesson
\par 
\par \i\cf2 Move to the next section to read about the Toolbar.
\par Move to the previous section to read about Creating a Character.
\par \page
{\up +}
{\up $}
{\up #}
\pard\keepn \plain\fs24 
\par \b\fs28 The Library\line
\plain\i\fs22\cf3 \'93The most powerful weapon of all is Knowledge.\'94\plain\fs24 
\par \i\fs22\cf3 \tab - \b \'93Minsak\'94, Scribe for the Library\plain\fs24 
\par 
\par \pard 
\par \fs20 The Library is where all of the information that the guilds collect from their explorers is located.  This includes information on both Items and Monsters. Whenever an explorer encounters a new Item or Monster, and can identify it enough to place it in the Library, it is automatically added for all others to see and use.  As a monster or item is identified more thoroughly by an explorer, the information in the library will be updated.
\par 
\par \b\cf1 Items\plain\fs24 
\par \pard\li175 \fs20 Besides the general item information that is obtainable either by identifying an item in the store or in the Items Window (based on current knowledge), the Library also keeps track of how many times a specific item has been found, what creature it was found by last, and when.
\par \fs24 
\par \pard \b\fs20\cf1 Monsters\plain\fs24 
\par \pard\li175 \fs20 Monster information is a little different from Item Information.  Unlike Items, which a character can get info on at any time, a character can only get monster information while in the dungeon when they have a companion.  However, in the library, general information on monsters can be found.  This can include everything from stats and special abilities.  It is also recorded where the last monster of a specific type was last seen, and how long ago.\fs24 
\par \pard \fs20 
\par The only way to completely identify a Monster is for a character to have it as a companion and either have the ID skill to learn all it can about the creature, or take it to the Holding and Confinement Center for identification.
\par 
\par \b\cf1 Other Explorers\plain\fs24 
\par \pard\li175 \fs20 You may quite often notice that item and monster entries appear in the library that you and your characters have not entered.  These entries are made by other explorers that have wandered into the depths and returned to report their findings (and quite often end up selling the items and companions that they may have come across during their exploration).\fs24 
\par \pard \fs20 
\par \i\cf2 Move to the next section to read about Spells.
\par Move to the previous section to read The City Guilds.
\par 
\par \page
{\up +}
{\up $}
{\up #}
\pard\keepn \plain\b\fs28 The Toolbar\plain\fs24 
\par \pard 
\par \fs20 \{bml bm16.bmp\}
\par 
\par Depending on the page mode, the Toolbar is a collection of icons that allow the player to carry out commands at the click of a button, or a display of character information.  Below is a list of the command options from left to right:
\par 
\par \{bmc bm17.bmp\} \b\cf1 Page\plain\fs24 
\par \pard\li175 \fs20 Clicking this button will switch the toolbar between two display modes (or pages), being either the icon (command) page, or the info (resistances) page.
\par \fs24 
\par \pard \fs20 \{bmc bm18.bmp\} \b\cf1 Help\plain\fs24 
\par \pard\li175 \fs20 Selecting this will load the Mordor Helplesson and display the table of contents.
\par \fs24 
\par \pard \fs20 \{bmc bm19.bmp\} \b\cf1 Guild Experience Information\plain\fs24 
\par \pard\li175 \fs20 This will display the current characters experience and quest information.
\par This functions the same as pressing F5
\par \fs24 
\par \pard \fs20 \{bmc bm20.bmp\} \b\cf1 AutoMap\plain\fs24 
\par \pard\li175 \fs20 Selecting this will display (or set focus to) the Automap.
\par This functions the same as pressing F8
\par \fs24 
\par \pard \fs20 \{bmc bm21.bmp\} \b\cf1 Ask Character to Join\plain\fs24 
\par \pard\li175 \fs20 Use this command to ask other characters to join you.
\par This functions the same as pressing \'91a\'92.
\par \fs24 
\par \pard \fs20 \{bmc bm22.bmp\} \b\cf1 Give Item\plain\fs24 
\par \pard\li175 \fs20 Use this command to give items to other characters within a party.
\par This functions the same as pressing \'91g\'92.
\par \fs24 
\par \pard \fs20 \{bmc bm23.bmp\} \b\cf1 Pickup Body\plain\fs24 
\par \pard\li175 \fs20 Select this option to pick up another characters dead body.
\par This functions the same as pressing \'91p\'92.
\par \fs24 
\par \pard \fs20 \{bmc bm24.bmp\} \b\cf1 Drop Body\plain\fs24 
\par \pard\li175 \fs20 Selecting this option will cause the current character to drop whatever they are carrying (being either the body of a companion or another character).
\par This functions the same as pressing \'91l\'92.
\par \fs24 
\par \pard \fs20 \{bmc bm25.bmp\} \b\cf1 Control Panel\plain\fs24 
\par \pard\li175 \fs20 This will bring up the Control Panel for the Character.
\par This functions the same as pressing F10.\fs24 
\par \pard \fs20 
\par The right hand side of the toolbar is used to display general information for when a character is either in the City or the Dungeon.
\par 
\par If desired, the Toolbar can be turned off in the Options Window either from the Main Menu, or the Character Control Panel.
\par 
\par \i\cf2 Move to the next section to read about the City.
\par Move to the previous section to read about the Game Screen.
\par \page
{\up +}
{\up $}
{\up #}
\pard\keepn {\up K}
{\up K}
{\up K}
{\up K}
{\up K}
{\up K}
{\up K}
\plain\b\fs28 General Troubleshooting\plain\fs24 
\par \pard 
\par \pard\qc \b\fs20\cf1 NOTE: 16-bit Mordor does not directly support long directory names under Windows NT or Windows 95\plain\fs24 
\par \pard \fs20 
\par \b Messed up Numbers/Currency\plain\fs24 
\par \pard\li175 \fs20 If you are in another country that uses a currency other than dollars (Germany, for example), Mordor should work just fine.  However, there have been some reports of problem with some German and Swiss versions of windows where some of the numbers are displayed improperly.  If you experience this problem, you will need to switch the currency format to US while playing Mordor.\fs24 
\par \pard \fs20 
\par \b Program Managers other than Windows Program Manager\plain\fs24 
\par \pard\li175 \fs20 I cannot guarantee complete functionality with other program managers for Windows (i.e. Norton Desktop).  If you are experiencing problems playing Mordor and are using a manager other than the one that comes with Windows, I would recommend switching back to the Windows Program Manager and seeing if the problem(s) disappear.\fs24 
\par \pard \fs20 
\par \b Microsoft Office\plain\fs24 
\par \pard\li175 \fs20 It has been reported that the Microsoft Office toolbar can greatly interfere with MORDOR.  If you have this up, be sure to unload it if you are having any problems running MORDOR.\fs24 
\par \pard \fs20 
\par \b Windows NT/Win95\plain\fs24 
\par \pard\li175 \fs20 If you are playing MORDOR under Windows NT or Win95 and are having problems, make sure that MORDOR is running in a separate VDM.  You can change this setting by selecting the icon in the Program manager, hitting Alt-Enter and clicking on the Separate VDM check box.
\par 
\par If you are using Windows NT 3.5 with Full Drag on, it\'92s recommended that you turn it off to play the game (this is the feature that instantly drags and updates windows as you move/size them).  You can do this in the Control Panel/Desktop section.
\par \pard\li175 
\par Also, if you are using Sound FX under Win95 and are experiencing 'skipping' when the files are played, be sure to enter the following line in your WAVEMIX.INI file:
\par \f3 WaveBlockLen=4096\f2\fs24 
\par \pard \fs20 
\par \b (about) Error\plain\fs24 
\par \pard\li175 \fs20 If you encounter an error similar to "(about) property cannot be set at runtime" when you start Mordor, you probably have an old VBX file lying around somewhere other than the one in your WINDOWS\'5cSYSTEM directory that the game is accessing (i.e. the WINDOWS directory).  The .VBX file that usually causes this problem is VBCTL3D.VBX.  The solution is to make sure the VBCTL3D.VBX file in your WINDOWS\'5cSYSTEM directory is the latest one and that another doesn't exist on your system someplace else!\fs24 
\par \pard \fs20 
\par \b GPFs & Video Problems\plain\fs24 
\par \pard\li175 \fs20 90% of all GPFs in MORDOR are caused by old MUSIC or DISPLAY drivers.  To get the latest drivers, please contact the manufacturer of your Sound/Video card either by phone or on Compuserve.  A good technique for testing Video Driver incompatibilities is to install the 800x600x16 (or 256) color driver that comes with windows.  If the errors do not persist while using this driver, the problems are more than likely the drivers you have for your display card.
\par \fs24 
\par \pard \b\fs20 Fonts\plain\fs24 
\par \pard\li175 \fs20 If, for some reason, you have removed the \i Courier New \plain\fs20 font from your system (which comes with Windows 3.1), some text may not appear correctly or not at all (especially in the information box).  To correct this, simply reinstall the \i Courier New\plain\fs20  font or select another Proportional font in the Options section from the Main Menu.\fs24 
\par \pard \fs20 
\par \b 64K Colors\plain\fs24 
\par \pard\li175 \fs20 Some players running in 64K colors will see no maze or monster pictures while playing (which, of course, means that the game is not playable).  Because there has been no standard set for 64K colors, quite a few drivers will not work with Mordor at this color level.  There isn\'92t much that one can do except for switch to either 16 Million (TrueColor) Colors, or 256 Colors.  I apologize for this, but it\'92s out of my hands.\fs24 
\par \pard \fs20 
\par \b Black/No Pictures\plain\fs24 
\par \pard\li175 \fs20 Not all Video Drivers are completely compatible with the Windows \i StretchBlt\plain\fs20  API call, which takes a bitmap and stretches it to a certain size.  If you run into the problem of blank or black pictures, you need to set the \b No StretchBlt\plain\fs20  option in the Options panel from the Main Menu to \b True\plain\fs20 .  This will cause the graphics to be displayed at default size and not resize themselves to the screen.  \i This option will not help 64K Color problems\plain\fs20 .\fs24 
\par \pard \fs20 
\par \b No Music\plain\fs24 
\par \pard\li175 \fs20 If the MIDI player that came with your sound card works, but MORDOR doesn\'92t, you probably need to create a new MIDI MAP that uses a different PORT NAME for every port (all 16).  See the \uldb MIDI Mapper & TroubleShooting\plain\fs20  section for more information.
\par \fs24 
\par \pard \b\fs20 Bad Music\plain\fs24 
\par \pard\li175 \fs20 If the Music played by Mordor doesn\'92t sound good, you probably need to either get the latest drivers for your sound card, or re-map your Extended MIDI map.  Please consult the manual that came with your sound card and/or the \uldb MIDI Mapper & TroubleShooting\plain\fs20  section for more information.
\par \fs24 
\par \pard \b\fs20 Bad Sound FX\plain\fs24 
\par \pard\li175 \fs20 Be sure to check the date of your WAVMIX16.DLL and make sure it\'92s as recent as the .DLL that comes with MORDOR.  If not, manually copy it over.  If problems persist, try changing the ShowDevices option in the [general] section of WAVEMIX.INI (located in the WINDOWS directory) to 1.  This will cause WAVMIX16.DLL to display message windows when errors are encountered with more information on the problem.  From here, it\'92s up to you!\fs24 
\par \pard \fs20 
\par If you are having any problems that are not listed above, or need further assistance, please contact Mordor Technical Support via CIS (\i\cf2 102033,242\plain\fs20 ).
\par 
\par \page
{\up $}
{\up #}
\pard\keepn \b\fs28 Tutorial\plain\fs24 
\par \pard 
\par \fs20 Welcome to the Mordor "tutorial\'94.  This section was designed to walk a you through creating a character, buying the proper items in a store, entering the dungeon, and dealing with your first monster.
\par 
\par This window will stay on top until you decide to close it (or open the Race/Guild Stats Window).  To move on to the next "section\'94, simply scroll the window when you have completed the previous "section\'94.  Go ahead and position/size the window so it is convenient for you to view.
\par \pard \fs24 
\par \i\fs20\cf1 Starting Out\plain\fs24 
\par \fs20 First thing to do is to select the Create Character button from the Main Menu of Mordor.  Once you\'92ve done that, you will see the Character Creation Screen pop up.  Here, you select your character\'92s Name, Sex, Race, Alignment and Stats.  Since you\'92re just starting out, go ahead and pick whatever name you like, select a Human for the race, whatever sex you like, and select Neutral for the alignment.  Next, move over to the stats and click on the buttons for the associated stats to set the values to 12, 12, 12, 11, 5, 12.  You will notice that when you take away points from your Charisma (move it down to 5), you receive points you can put in your other stats.
\par \pard \fs24 
\par \i\fs20\cf1 It\'92s a good idea to always keep your Int and Wis at a value of 10, so your character can use any Tomes they might find (items to raise stats which require 10 int and 10 wis to use).\plain\fs24 
\par \fs20 
\par Now, click the Save Character button.  When prompted for a password, enter any password you wish.  The game will ask you to reenter it, so don't worry if you make a mistake.  If no one else will be playing Mordor on your machine, or if you wish to share all of your characters, you may simply hit enter when prompted for a password to create a character without a password.  If you later decide you would like to add a password, you may use the Change Password option from the Main Menu to do so.
\par \pard 
\par Once your character has been created, the game will return you to the Main Menu.  To begin playing, select the button labeled "Run <your character name>".
\par 
\par Now, you see the main screen.  If you are using 640x480 VGA, you may have to do a little arranging to see all of the windows at once.  If you are using 800x600 or higher resolution, you will be able to see everything without any problems.  If you want, you can also resize the windows to fit your screen (make them bigger or smaller).
\par \pard \fs24 
\par \i\fs20\cf1 Overview of Stats\plain\fs24 
\par \fs20 The window in the upper left hand corner with your character\'92s name as the heading is the main Stats window.  This default tab in this window (stats) contains your character\'92s age, hits, spells, stats, etc.  The space to the right of the stats is used for special adjusters (I.E. Levitating, Poisoned, Diseased, etc.).  As you see, your hits are 15/15, which means your are at full strength.  If you reach 0/15, you will be dead.  Your Attack and Defense is 0/0 which means you\'92re pretty much a wimp right now.  You have 120 spell points and are at Spell level 1, but it doesn\'92t really help much since your current guild (Nomad) isn\'92t a magic-user guild.  
\par \pard 
\par The other tabs located in this window are for other types of character information.  If you want to look in the current area to see what other characters are around (after you have created more than one), you can click on the 'Look' tab, which will display the current characters in the 'room' or 'area'.  You can look at resistances, character statistics, buffers, etc.  You'll learn all of these tabs as you become more familiar with the game and read the \uldb Game Screen\plain\fs20  section of this Helplesson.
\par \pard 
\par Next we have the Objects & Spells Window, which contains 3 main tabs - Items, Spells and Companions.  The Items tab is used to display the items your character is currently wearing or carrying.  After we go to the store and purchase some neat stuff, you can equip the items, which will then raise your Attack and Defense so you won\'92t be a wimp anymore.  Since you don't know any spells offhand, there's really not much to look at in the Spell Tab - and since you have no Companions, there's not much there either.  As you begin to play, these windows will fill with spells your character has learned and creatures you have befriended or bound!
\par \pard 
\par The Messages window is for various messages that will be displayed during the game. It is important since messages about significant events will be displayed here.
\par 
\par And finally, we have the Party window.  This is where the list of any characters in your party is shown.  Since you're by yourself, you only see the information on the one character.  Later on, as you venture into the depths with an organized party, the other characters will be displayed in this window, allowing you to move/switch to them with the click of a button!  This window is also useful for keeping track of your character's hits & status when a tab other than the 'stats' tab is showing in the main character window!
\par \pard 
\par Before we delve into the city, go ahead and press F6.  You\'92ll see the 'Char' tab in the Character Window pop up with your character\'92s statistical information.  Don\'92t really worry about what all this means right now - you\'92ll understand it later.  This Information Window is used in many ways - when you identify an item, information about the item is displayed here.  When you press F4 (go for it), your character\'92s current resistance information is displayed. As you can see, the tabs in this window present a wide variety of information on a wide range of subjects.
\par \pard 
\par You may have also noticed the toolbar at the top of the screen.  It's mostly there for convenience, and can be turned off in the Options Window.  You can carry out an order by clicking on a specific icon, or click on the page icon to switch to your character's 'resistances'.  Give it a try.  Gold and Experience information for the current character are also displayed on the right hand side of the toolbar.  For more information, read the \uldb Toolbar\plain\fs20  section in this Helplesson.
\par \pard \fs24 
\par \i\fs20\cf1 The City\plain\fs24 
\par \fs20 Welcome to the wonderful and exciting city of Mordor.  Everything a character could ever want is found in the city.  You have the store, where you can purchase, sell, identify, combine and Uncurse items.  You have the Morgue, where you can raise dead characters or companions, or hire rescuers to find a lost character.  The Bank is a place to store your items and money - unlike the real world, the Bank of Mordor cannot be robbed, so your money is perfectly safe.  You have the Guilds, which is where your character will learn skills and abilities to become more powerful.  The Seer is available for those who are seeking a lost character or quested monster or item.  And the Holding & Confinement facility is there for explorers to purchase creatures as companions, or sell existing companions.  Each of these places will be described later.
\par \pard \fs24 
\par \i\fs20\cf1 Outfitting your Character - the Store\plain\fs24 
\par \fs20 The first thing every eager adventurer should do is buy neat items to defend themselves from the foul and evil wretches of the dungeon.  Go ahead and click on the General Store button.  Welcome to the store!  If you need to, go ahead and move the windows so you can see the General Store and your Items window at the same time.  Don\'92t worry if you have to cover up your statistics window.
\par 
\par Let\'92s run through the sections of the store.  First, we have the "Uncurse Item\'94 section.  This is where your character may remove items that they equipped that were either cursed or had an alignment that was the opposite of your character's alignment.  Some items your character will find in the dungeon will be oppositely aligned others will be downright cursed. That\'92s why it\'92s not a good idea to equip anything that\'92s not completely identified.  You will know what an item is after you have completely identified the item.  Also, if you have a character whose alignment is "good\'94 and equip with an Iron Sword that\'92s "Evil\'94 (e) your character will LOSE instead of gain fighting ability, A/D, etc. - plus you will have to pay to have the item uncursed before your character can unequip the item.
\par \pard 
\par "Combine Items\'94 is used for combining \i\b like\plain\fs20  items (i.e. 2 potions of curing into 1).  This feature is free and it allows your character to be better organized and carry more items. The risk is that if a combined item is lost or stolen, you lose more.
\par 
\par Next, we have our "Identify, Realign & Sell Items\'94 section.  This area is used to identify items found in the dungeon that your character doesn\'92t know much about, sell items, display the information on an item, and realign an item.  We'll get to that in just a moment......
\par \pard 
\par \i\cf2 To place an item in any of the text boxes, you can either type in the item number, or drag an item from your Items window and drop it in the text box.
\par \plain\fs24 
\par \fs20 Let's start off by setting our focus on the Buy Items section of the Store.  From here, one can browse and purchase items that are in the stores inventory.\i\cf2   \plain\fs20 See the list of items to the right?  Click on the Bronze Sword (highlight it blue).  See how there\'92s a 350 to the right of the item?  That means that it costs 350 gold pieces. Items that can only be found in the store will have the cost directly to the right of them. As you find items and sell them to the store, the price will be displayed differently.  For instance, notice the \i Iron Sword\plain\fs20  in the store - to the right of it you will see " 0 1 1 1\'94, instead of a price.  This means that there are a total of three types of this sword in inventory - \b 0\plain\fs20  unaligned, \b 1\plain\fs20  good, \b 1\plain\fs20  neutral and \b 1\plain\fs20  evil.  So to find the price, or buy, an iron sword, click on Iron Sword - you will then be able to specify \b U\plain\fs20 naligned, \b G\plain\fs20 ood, \b N\plain\fs20 eutral, or \b E\plain\fs20 vil, after which you can see the price and buy the item (well actually you can\'92t buy it because you don\'92t have enough money). If you find an Evil \i Tome of Might\plain\fs20  and sell it when there is none in the store, the listing would then read "Tome of Might     0 0 0 1\'94. Also, the store charges a price that corresponds to the number of items in stock, for example if Iron Sword was  0 2 9 4, Neutral iron swords would be cheaper than either Good or Evil Iron Swords. It is also helpful to note that Unaligned items can be used by characters of all alignments.
\par \pard 
\par Now, to get on with buying some items. Click on Bronze Sword, see how the item name popped into the box under the list of items, along with the price?  Notice the 9(u) in front of the cost?  That means that there\'92s 9 Unaligned items of that type in stock.  If you had selected a Good item, it would read 4(g). Now, let\'92s look at the Bronze Sword information. Click on the Info button next to the Buy button.  The Misc tab in the Character Window automatically pops up with the information.  This tab shows you all of the information that the store has on the item - how it affects attack & defense, what the class of the item is, how many hands it takes to use (if any), what guilds are allowed to use it, etc.  Depending on the item, additional information may also be shown, such as the number of 'swings' that a weapon provides, or what spell an item casts (and how may times).  For more information, see \uldb The Game Screen\plain\fs20  Section of this Helplesson.
\par \pard 
\par Well, now that you know all about this sword, click the Buy button.  Voila!  You\'92re the proud owner of a Bronze Sword.  Now, go through and buy the following items:
\par \i \tab Leather Armor
\par \tab Leather Gloves
\par \tab Cloth Cloak
\par \tab Leather Boots
\par \tab Wooden Shield
\par \tab Copper Helmet
\par 
\par \plain\fs20 Before we leave the store, drag one of the items from your Items Window and drop it into the "Identify, Realign & Sell Items\'94 \'91item\'92 text box.  See how it tells you what they have in stock ((u)99 99 unaligned) and the price you can sell it for.  As you can see, it\'92s a substantial difference between what you paid and what you can sell it for.  Clicking on the Info button will bring up the same information you saw earlier - the item is also completely identified.  However, when you find an item in the dungeon, bring it here, drop it in the text box and click ID to identify it, you will frequently not know everything about the item.  Some items will require more than one identification stage.  Which usually, but not necessarily, means they are more valuable. Also, you can click the Info button after every ID process and you will see how the information becomes more detailed.
\par \pard 
\par When you find items that are aligned, you have the option of realigning it by using the item realign services of the store. However, the store extracts a hefty fee for this service.  If you have a good item and want to realign it to evil, drag and drop it into the item text box (under Identify, Realign & Sell Items) and click on the E button and you\'92ll be told how much it will cost to realign it.  The reason a character may wish to realign an item is to be able to use it.  If a Good character finds a Neutral (n) or Evil (e) item, equipping the item will not benefit the character (and become cursed if it's oppositely aligned) in any way, so the character can bring the item to the store and realign it to their actual alignment so they can equip and use the item and receive the full benefit of the items abilities (added attack, defense, etc).
\par \pard 
\par You may notice, in starting out, that things appear very expensive.  The average Tome costs over 200,000 to identify for just the first stage.  Initially the best way to go about this is to sell the first few items you find without identifying them and use that money to identify other found items, then sell those until you have enough money to identify everything you find and make a profit from it.  Items that aren\'92t completely identified will not bring their full value when sold, while other items may be less valuable when fully identified.
\par \pard 
\par For more information on the Store, be sure it read the \uldb City: Store\plain\fs20  section of this Helplesson.
\par \fs24 
\par \i\fs20\cf1 The Bank\plain\fs24 
\par \fs20 Okay!  Click on the Exit button to return to the City menu and select the bank icon.  Now that the bank is open you can see the separate sections of the bank.  You can deposit money, withdraw money, and deposit & withdraw items.  Most of the time, you will probably want to use the ALL buttons to either deposit the money on your character or withdraw it.  To deposit items, drag the item from the Items tab of the Objects & Spells window and drop them in the Bank Items list box.  To withdraw them, do just the opposite - drag a Bank item back to the Items tab.  However, since you don't need to deposit or withdraw any items, let's deal with the gold on your character!  For right now, click the \'91All\'92 button in the deposit area.  You just deposited All of your remaining gold into the bank.  If you want to take money out just withdraw it.  However, you wouldn\'92t very often need to withdraw gold, this is because all of the service and goods providers in the city can automatically withdraw gold from your account when you make a transaction (kind of like electronic banking).  You can also deposit to or withdraw items from the bank.  The reason for this is to secure an item from being slimed or stolen in the dungeon.  Keep in mind, however, that items in the Bank are not with you and therefore cannot be used in the dungeon.
\par \pard For more information on the Bank, be sure to read the \uldb City: Bank\plain\fs20  section of the Helplesson, which will describe the Party options in more detail (for when you need them).
\par \fs24 
\par \i\fs20\cf1 The Guilds\plain\fs24 
\par \fs20 Let\'92s leave the bank and mosey over to the guilds.  Once you enter the guilds, you automatically enter your current guild - the Nomad\'92s guild.  You can see who the Guild Master is, what stats are required to enter this guild, and a welcome message.  On the right is a list of the other guilds that you can visit to see about joining.  For this Tutorial, however, we'll just stick with the Nomad's guild.  You might notice (if you read the Guilds section of the Helplesson) that some guilds are missing from the list.  
\par \pard 
\par The only guilds that are shown are those that your character is eligible to join based on your race and alignment.  However, just because you are eligible doesn't mean that you can join - you still have to meet the minimum stat requirements and have enough money to pay any initiation fees.  As you play Mordor, you'll discover items that will allow you to raise your stats, so don't worry too much if you don't qualify for any guilds besides Nomad right now.
\par 
\par Let's move on!  You will see a total of Seven buttons on the Guilds form, two of which are unavailable (Make Level and Reacquaint).  The other 5 are Visit, Library, Guild Log Experience Info and Exit.  The Visit button allows you to visit another guild other than your current guild (by selecting another guild available in the List Box and clicking on the Visit Button).  The \uldb Library\plain\fs20  button will take you to the Library, which is a branch of the guilds that will become very useful later.  The Guild Log button will bring up the Guild Log, which lists the latest events that have taken place - but since you're starting out, nothing will really be listed.
\par \pard 
\par Go ahead and click on the Exp. Info button and you\'92ll see a message box stating how much experience you need to make the next guild level, in this case level 2.  When you make levels, your hits points go up and usually your A/D increases as well.  To gain experience, you need to go down into the dungeon and slay some monsters.  When your character has enough experience to "make level\'94, return to the Guild and use the Make Level button to increase your characters skills.  The reacquaint button will become available when you belong to more than one guild and you want to visit a guild you were previously an active member of. This button also doubles as the "join" button when you first visit a guild you are not a member of.
\par \pard \fs24 
\par \i\fs20\cf1 The Morgue\plain\fs24 
\par \fs20 We\'92ll skip the Morgue for right now, since it\'92s fairly self-explanatory, and nobody has died yet.  When you do need to visit the morgue you will find it very easy to use. The morgue workers can raise characters or companions as well as go into the dungeon and retrieve characters. It is important to note however that the morgue extracts a fee for these services and the fee can be substantial. Keep in mind that with any type of resurrection (from the morgue or a spell), there is always the risk of complications during resurrection that can leave your character permanently disadvantaged.  For more information on Complications, see the section on \uldb Dying & Dealing with Death\plain\fs20  in this Helplesson.
\par \pard \fs24 
\par \i\fs20\cf1 Holding & Confinement\plain\fs24 
\par \fs20 We'll also skip this neat city service - later on, as you collect more gold, you can go here and purchase companions to help you out in the depths below - you can also bring creatures back from the depths and sell them for profit!  Just think of how much money a skilled Mage could make doing that!
\par \fs24 
\par \i\fs20\cf1 The Dungeon\plain\fs24 
\par \fs20 Well, let\'92s get going!  Exit the guilds window and click on the dungeon button!  You are now in the exciting world of the dungeon.  There is a wall behind you and to your left and right, and  ahead these is a door.  You are currently at the stairs that take you to the city.  If you wanted to go back to the city, you\'92d press \'91t\'92 - to take the stairs.  First thing you need to do is get ready for the nasties.  Make sure the Stats tab is visible in the Character window (so you can watch your A/D increase as you equip items).  Next, start equipping your items by selecting (clicking) on your Bronze Sword (highlighting it blue), then clicking the Equip button.  See how your A/D went up?  Let\'92s get it a little higher.  Go ahead and hit Equip again (you see that after you equip an item the one after it is highlighted).  Go ahead and stop equipping when all of the items are equipped.  Now, you\'92re ready!  Movement in the dungeon can be done either via the Dungeon Command window (clicking on the appropriate button), or the Keyboard.  For beginners, I suggest the Keyboard, because the command window is just too slow for the first time.
\par \pard The other buttons on the Dungeon window are used to carry out actions and bring up information (which can be entered with the Keyboard as well).  The numbers represent Buffers and act the same as pressing Shift-#.  For more information on these commands, see the \uldb Commands\plain\fs20  section in this Helplesson.
\par 
\par Go ahead and press the Up (forward) arrow.  You\'92re now at the door.  Take a look to your right by pressing the right arrow.  You should see three doors, Good. Now, turn around by pressing the down (turn around) arrow so you can look behind you.  You see a hall way that continues beyond the limits of your vision.  Now, press the right arrow again to face the door.
\par \pard \fs24 
\par \i\fs20\cf1 Combat\plain\fs24 
\par \fs20 Beyond that door is a nasty little critter, maybe even two of them.  So, for your first lesson in combat you\'92re going to run in, then immediately turn around and run back out.  You will go through the door by pressing the forward arrow (don\'92t do it yet!), and run out by holding down the shift key and pressing the down (turn around) arrow.  The down (turn around) arrow turns your character around.  By pressing the Shift key at the same time, you tell the game to turn around AND take a step forward.  So, what you\'92re going to do is run into the room (up arrow) and then run out (shift+down arrow), right?  Now, make sure you get a good look at the monster(s) when you first walk into the room.  You may get hit - and even killed if they are able to hit you when you first enter and then turn to run.  If that happens, create another character and try again.  Now, run into the room, look at the monster(s) and run back out!  If you didn't leave the room quick enough, there's a chance that your character will have swung and hit (and maybe even killed) a monster before they ran out (since the default fight option for a character is attack).
\par \pard 
\par Well, wasn\'92t that fun. If you got hit go back to the city (one step forward) and press \'91t\'92 (or click on the \'91take\'92 button).  When you enter the city, you\'92ll see that your hits (after resting) are back to normal.  If you didn\'92t get hit, you\'92re ready to take out whatever it was *gulp*.  You may be wondering why the monster(s) were able to swing at you even though you didn't do anything besides run in and out.  This is because Combat in Mordor happens in real time - whether you\'92re ready or not - the monster(s) are always ready.  Combat takes place in 2 second rounds. You get to swing, then the monster does, and so on.  Fortunately, you can run away and save your hide, allowing you to return to the city and recover your hit points before doing battle once again with the nasties.  You may use this as your main "weapon" in trying to survive the first few levels - that's why you learned it first!  This is going to be your main advantage in staying alive for the first few levels.
\par \pard 
\par Now, if you feel up to it and you're all healed up, go back into that room and nail those monsters!  Since your character will automatically begin fighting a creature if they are at war, all you need to do is walk in and watch the fight (unless they are 'peaced', in which case you will want to hit 'f' to begin fighting).  Keep in mind that if the monster hits your character, you'll probably want to turn around and go back to the castle to heal up before continuing the fight.  Even though your character may start automatically fighting, it's up to you to get them out of there if things turn bad!
\par \pard 
\par So, Go for it!
\par 
\par If you were successful, you killed the monster(s), if weren\'92t - you\'92re probably dead.  If you\'92re really having a tough time, try creating a Giant with maximum Strength and Dexterity by taking points away from Intelligence and Wisdom.  That\'92ll be one hard character to kill.
\par 
\par Now, if you killed the monsters, you\'92ll notice you have some experience points and probably found some gold (unless they had a chest).  If they had a chest, it\'92s sitting there, waiting to be opened (unless it\'92s "Magically Locked\'94).  If it\'92s not "Magically Locked\'94 you will see the trap description and "+/-\'94 characters next to the chest.  That tells you how good you are at identifying and disarming traps.  For more information, you\'92ll need to read the Help Lesson - heck, you\'92ll end up reading it sooner or later anyway.  If there\'92s a chest, press \'91o\'92 to open it.  Gold!  Neat!  Did you find an item?  If so, you can take it back up and try to identify it (if you have enough gold) or sell it.
\par \pard \fs24 
\par \i\fs20\cf1 Follow up\plain\fs24 
\par \fs20 So much for your first encounter - Feel like a studmuffin yet?  Well, you\'92ve got a long way to go.  You\'92ve probably noticed that when you kill the monsters that are in a room and go back, it\'92s empty.  That\'92s because they\'92re dead!  However, after a period of time, the dungeon will "repopulate\'94 with new monsters.  So, until then, you're going to have to go exploring.  Since the monsters you killed won't reappear for awhile, you should remember the most recent path you took so you can retrace it when returning to the city (turning on the \uldb Automap\plain\fs20  by pressing F8 while in the dungeon helps).  There's nothing more challenging than trying to fight a running battle back to the city when what you wanted was a full scale retreat!  Keep in mind that you\'92ll stay alive by running away when your character\'92s hits get low.  After awhile, you\'92ll be strong enough to not really have to worry about little encounters.
\par \pard 
\par As mentioned above, your character will automatically begin fighting if they enter a room with hostile monsters (or the monsters become hostile).  You can chance this by clicking on the Options button in the Party window and modifying the action for each character in the party (right now, there's only one) to carry out during a combat situation.
\par 
\par Even though this little "tutorial\'94 got you started, it\'92s recommended that you go ahead and read the entire Helplesson  You\'92ll need to anyway to find out what guilds are available, their abilities, and what races can join them.  Mordor is a \i very\plain\fs20  large game - easy enough for the beginner, and complex enough for the serious player.
\par \pard 
\par As you become more familiar with Mordor, you may want to organize a \uldb Party\plain\fs20  to explore the depths below.  To do this, simply press the 'a' key to ask a character who is in the current area to join you!
\par 
\par Well, you should be able to figure it out from here!  Good Luck!
\par 
\par \i\cf2 Note: For players who have access to CompuServe, you can discuss the game and ask any questions you may have in Section 17 (Mordor BetaTest) of the GAMERS forum!  There will also be Internet sites very soon for Mordor help & discussion!\plain\fs24 
\par \page
{\up +}
{\up $}
{\up #}
\pard\keepn {\up K}
{\up K}
{\up K}
{\up K}
{\up K}
{\up K}
{\up K}
{\up K}
{\up K}
{\up K}
{\up K}
{\up K}
\b\fs28 Visual Spells\plain\fs24 
\par \pard 
\par \fs20 In a collected effort, the Sorcerer\'92s and Wizard\'92s guilds managed to create spells that allowed one to turn invisible to the naked eye, and allowed one to see those who were invisible as well.
\par \fs24 
\par \pard\li175 \b\fs20 Sight Veil\tab 
\par \plain\fs20 Base Level: 2\tab Guilds: See (6), Mag (4), Sor, Wiz (8)
\par Required Stats: 12 Int, 12 Wis, 12 Cha\tab 
\par \i NON-COMBAT Spell, will cause the receiving character to become Invisible.
\par \plain\fs20 This spell is very useful defensive spell.  When cast the recipient becomes invisible to the naked eye, only those with special abilities will be able to see the character.
\par  \tab  
\par \b See Invisible\tab 
\par \plain\fs20 Base Level: 2\tab Guilds: See (6), Mag (4), Sor, Wiz (8)
\par Required Stats: 12 Int, 12 Wis, 12 Cha\tab 
\par \pard\li175 \i NON-COMBAT Spell, will cause the receiving character to see Invisible.
\par \plain\fs20 This spell will enable a character to see those who are invisible to the naked eye.
\par  \tab  
\par \b Mass Sight Veil\tab 
\par \plain\fs20 Base Level: 8\tab Guilds: Sor
\par Required Stats: 10 Str, 12 Int, 16 Wis, 10 Cha, 10 Dex\tab 
\par \i NON-COMBAT Spell, will cause the entire party to become Invisible.
\par \plain\fs20 This spell is the same as Sight Veil except that it affects the entire party.
\par \fs24 
\par \pard \i\fs20\cf2 Move to the next section to read about Magical Spells.
\par Move to the previous section to read about Resistant Spells.
\par \page
{\up +}
{\up $}
{\up #}
\pard\keepn {\up K}
\plain\fs20 
\par \{ewl FH_BMP.DLL,FH_BMP,dwarf.bmp\}\b\fs28\cf1 Mordor 1.1 HelpLesson\line
\plain\fs20 (Last Edited 7/5/95)\line
\line
Welcome to the Mordor HelpLesson!  If this is your first time, it is recommended that you use the available browse buttons to go through the sequential order of the HelpLesson.
\par \fs24 
\par \pard 
\par \b\fs20\cf1 Below is a list of Mordor Game Playing Topics.\plain\fs24 
\par \pard\li715 \uldb \fs20 Introduction\plain\fs20 \tab \tab \tab \uldb Parties\plain\fs20 
\par \uldb The History of Mordor\plain\fs20 
\par \uldb Game Overview\plain\fs20 \tab \tab \tab \uldb Commands\plain\fs20 
\par \uldb Main Menu\plain\fs20 \tab \tab \tab \uldb Control Panel\plain\fs20 
\par \uldb Game Options Window\plain\fs20 
\par \uldb Character Information\plain\fs20 \tab \tab \uldb Beginner Hints & Tips\plain\fs20 
\par \uldb Races\plain\fs20 \tab \tab \tab \tab \uldb Frequently Asked Questions\plain\fs20 
\par \uldb Creating a Character\plain\fs20 
\par \uldb The Game Screen\plain\fs20 \tab \tab \b\cf1 Mordor Technical Information\plain\fs24 
\par \uldb \fs20 The Toolbar\plain\fs20 \tab \tab \tab \uldb System Requirements\plain\fs20 \fs24 
\par \uldb \fs20 The City\plain\fs20 \tab \tab \tab \uldb General Troubleshooting\plain\fs20 
\par \pard\li715 \uldb Items\plain\fs20 \tab \tab \tab \tab \uldb MIDI Mapper & TroubleShooting\plain\fs20 
\par \uldb Guilds\plain\fs20 
\par \uldb The Library\plain\fs20 \tab \tab \tab \b\cf1 Mordor Tutorial\plain\fs24 
\par \uldb \fs20 Spells\plain\fs20 \b\cf1 \tab \plain\fs20\cf1 \tab \tab \tab \uldb Tutorial\plain\fs20\cf1 \plain\fs24 
\par \uldb \fs20 The Dungeon\plain\fs20 
\par \uldb AutoMap\plain\fs20 \tab \tab \tab \b\cf1 Mordor Ordering Information\plain\fs24 
\par \uldb \fs20 Encounters\plain\fs20 \b\cf1 \tab \plain\fs20\cf1 \tab \tab \uldb Ordering Mordor\plain\fs20\cf1 \plain\fs24 
\par \uldb \fs20 Monsters\plain\fs20 
\par \uldb Companions\plain\fs20 \tab \tab \tab \b\cf1 Mordor Screen Saver\plain\fs24 
\par \uldb \fs20 Dying\plain\fs20 \tab \tab \tab \tab \uldb Information\plain\fs20 
\par \fs24 
\par \b\fs20 MORDOR is \'a9 Copyright 1994-1995, MakeItSo Software\plain\fs24 
\par \page
\pard \fs0\cf6\cb6 \page
}